The next proof is taken verbatim from Euclid VI.31 in translation by Sir Thomas L.
Heath. The great G. Polya analyzes it in his Induction and Analogy in Mathematics (II.5) which
is a recommended reading to students and teachers of Mathematics.
In right-angled triangles the figure on the side subtending the right angle is
equal to the similar and similarly described figures on the sides containing the right
angle.
Let ABC be a right-angled triangle having the angle BAC right;
I say that the figure on BC is equal to the similar and similarly described figures on
BA, AC.

Let AD be drawn perpendicular. Then since, in the right-angled triangle ABC, AD has been drawn from the right angle at
A perpendicular to the base BC, the triangles ABD, ADC adjoining the perpendicular are similar both to the whole ABC and to one another [VI.8].

And, since ABC is similar to ABD, therefore, as CB is to BA so is AB to BD [VI.Def.1].
And, since three straight lines are proportional, as the first is to the third, so is the
figure on the first to the similar and similarly described figure on the second [VI.19].
Therefore, as CB is to BD, so is the figure on CB to the similar and similarly described
figure on BA.

For the same reason also, as BC is to CD, so is the figure on BC to that on CA; so that,
in addition, as BC is to BD, DC, so is the figure on BC to the similar and similarly
described figures on BA, AC.
But BC is equal to BD, DC; therefore the figure on BC is also equal to the similar and
similarly described figures on BA, AC.
Therefore etc. Q.E.D.
Confession
I got a real appreciation of this proof only after reading the book by Polya I
mentioned above. I hope that a Java applet will help you
get to the bottom of this remarkable proof. Note that the statement actually proven
is much more general than the theorem as it's generally known. ( Another discussion looks at VI.31 from a little different angle.)

John Arioni came up with a beautiful illustration that also sheds light on the proof #8.
