Condensed Mathematics and Complex Geometry
Dustin Clausen, Peter Scholze
arXiv:2605.11731v1  [math.CV]  12 May 2026
Contents
Condensed Mathematics and Complex Geometry 5
Preface 5
1. Lecture I: Introduction 6
2. Lecture II: Liquid vector spaces 11
Appendix to Lecture II: Quasiseparated liquid vector spaces 21
3. Lecture III: Liquid vector spaces, redux 24
Appendix to Lecture III: Remarks on projective objects 32
4. Lecture IV: Liquid tensor product calculations 38
5. Lecture V: From formal nonsense to holomorphic functions 49
Appendix to Lecture V: Spectral Theory 58
6. Lecture VI: Analytification and GAGA 59
7. Lecture VII: Analytification and GAGA, redux 72
8. Lecture VIII: Nuclear modules 75
9. Lecture IX: Coherent Sheaves, I 87
10. Lecture X: Coherent Sheaves, II 94
Appendix to Lecture X: Noetherianity 98
11. Lecture XI: Complex analytic spaces 101
12. Lecture XII: Proper pushforward 109
13. Lecture XIII: Serre Duality, and GAGA for coherent sheaves 120
14. Lecture XIV: Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch, part I 127
15. Lecture XV: Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch, part II 137
Bibliography 147
3
Condensed Mathematics and Complex Geometry
Preface
This is a slightly revised version of lectures notes for a course in Summer 2022 joint between
Bonn and Copenhagen, intended as a stable citable version.
Many thanks go to Ko Aoki and Mohan Ramachandran for many comments, and in particular
for many pointers to the literature.
Dustin Clausen and Peter Scholze May 2026
5
6 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
1. Lecture I: Introduction
Over the last few years, we have been working on an alternative foundation for the development
of a (very general) ‚Äúanalytic geometry‚Äù, based on a new foundation for combining algebra and
topology, in the framework of ‚Äúcondensed mathematics‚Äù. These ideas have been laid out in the
lectures [Sch19] and [Sch20], given in 2019‚Äì2020.
The goal of this course will be to make these developments more concrete by concentrating on
the case of complex-analytic geometry, and instead of trying to develop new kinds of geometry,
we will here merely try to redevelop the classical theory, but from a different point of view. More
precisely, we aim to reprove some important theorems for compact complex manifolds, including:
(1) Finiteness of coherent cohomology;
(2) Serre Duality;
(3) In the algebraic case, GAGA;
(4) (Grothendieck‚Äì)Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch.
The proofs will be very different from previous proofs. Notably, at least for the first three
results, our proofs will be of a local nature; even better, we will formulate versions of these results
that are true even in the non-compact (sometimes also called non-proper) case. Moreover, we would
like to say that our proofs are proofs by ‚Äúformal nonsense‚Äù and in particular analysis-free. Let us
try to be somewhat more precise by what we have in mind here.
The most basic notion in complex analysis is that of a holomorphic function, in one variable.
The claim that this is a well-behaved notion is contained in the following theorem.
Theorem1.1.There is a (necessarily unique) sheafOon the topological spaceC, such that
for any open disc
D=D(x, r) ={z‚ààC| |z‚àíx|< r} ‚äÇC,
one has
O(D) ={
‚àûX
n=0
an(T‚àíx) n |a n ‚ààC,‚àÄr ‚Ä≤ < r, anr‚Ä≤n ‚Üí0},
with obvious transition mapsO(D)‚Üí O(D ‚Ä≤)forD ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇD.
Moreover, for any such discD, the sheaf cohomology groupsH i(D,O) = 0fori >0.
Here, the ‚Äúobvious‚Äù transition maps are those that are compatible with evaluation at points.
More precisely, ifz‚ààD(x, r) andf‚àà O(D), i.e.f= P‚àû
n=0 an(T‚àíx) n, thenf(z) = P‚àû
n=0 an(z‚àíx) n
is absolutely convergent inC, soO(D) maps (injectively) to the functions fromDtoC. Then
O(D)‚Üí O(D ‚Ä≤) is the unique map making
O(D) //

Map(D,C)

O(D‚Ä≤) // Map(D‚Ä≤,C)
commute. (One could also write down this map very explicitly in terms of power series.)
In other words, there should be a notion of ‚Äúholomorphic function‚Äù onD, a certain kind of
functionD‚ÜíC, and checking holomorphicity can be done locally. On the other hand, any such,
a priori locally defined, function, should have onDa global convergent Taylor series expansion.
1. LECTURE I: INTRODUCTION 7
The usual proof of this theorem is based on treating holomorphic functions as special smooth
functions, and most critically on Cauchy‚Äôs integral formula, based on integrating along paths. This
makes it possible to compute the Taylor coefficientsa n in terms of integrals around the circle
|z‚àíx|=r ‚Ä≤ for anyr ‚Ä≤ < r. For the final cohomology statement, one uses the exact sequence
0‚Üí O ‚ÜíC ‚àû ‚àÇ‚àí ‚ÜíC‚àû ‚Üí0,
and uses the good properties of the ‚àÇ-differential operator, as well as bump functions to see that
the higher cohomology of the sheaf ofC ‚àû-functions vanishes. This is analysis!
Already Weierstra√ü was trying to avoid the use of integrals in the proof of this theorem; he gave
an argument replacing the integrals by approximating finite sums, but in essence it is still the same
argument. In a letter to Schwarz dated October 3, 1875, Weierstra√ü writes (cf. [Rem84, Chapter
8, Section 2.2.3]):
‚ÄúJe mehr ich  Ãà uber die Principien der Functionentheorie nachdenke ‚Äì und ich thue dies un-
abl Ãà assig ‚Äì, um so fester wird meine  ÃàUberzeugung, dass diese auf dem Fundamente algebraischer
Wahrheiten aufgebaut werden muss, und dass es deshalb nicht der richtige Weg ist, wenn umgekehrt
zur Begr Ãà undung einfacher und fundamentaler algebraischer S Ãà atze das ‚ÄòTranszendente‚Äô, um mich
kurz auszudr Ãà ucken, in Anspruch genommen wird ‚Äì so bestechend auch auf den ersten Ablick z.B. die
Betrachtungen sein m Ãà ogen, durch welche Riemann so viele der wichtigsten Eigenschaften algebrais-
cher Functionen entdeckt hat. (Dass dem Forscher, so lange er sucht, jeder Weg gestattet sein
muss, versteht sich von selbst; es handelt sich nur um die systematische Begr Ãà undung.)‚Äù
In this course, we will try to develop complex geometry in this spirit.
Let us also remark that the above strategy of proof is extremely different from the strategy
of proof used to prove the corresponding result inp-adic geometry (known as ‚ÄúTate acyclicity‚Äù).
Part of our goal is to develop foundations for analytic geometry that treat archimedean and non-
archimedean geometry on equal grounds; and we will proceed by making archimedean geometry
more similar to non-archimedean geometry. In very rough outline, we will makeC[T] into an
‚Äúanalytic ring‚Äù, which will have an associated ‚Äúanalytic spectrum‚Äù AnSpecC[T]. Moreover, anyD
as above will correspond to an open subset of AnSpecC[T], and the theorem basically amounts to a
computation of the structure sheaf on AnSpecC[T] (that will exist, and have acyclicity properties, by
general theory). This computation will in fact be rather simple. So in this approach, one discovers
holomorphic functions as functions on certain open subsets of the analytic spectrum AnSpecC[T].
Let us step back for a moment and take a big picture look at the development of different kinds
of geometry. Basically, things started with the analysis of functions of several real variables,
f:R n ‚ÜíR m,
restricting to continuous, differentiable, or smooth functions. The focus here was always on the
infinitesimal variation of such functions; and functions are notably something that is determined
by its values (and vice-versa, any collection of values determines a function). Assumingnandm
even and identifyingR 2 =C, one can also restrict to complex-differentiable functions. The first big
surprise in the theory is that this already implies smoothness, and in fact that the function is given
by a convergent power series expansion. Here, a small shift happens: Any function is uniquely
given by a formula (its power series expansion). Generally, complex analysis becomes much more
rigid, and in fact is often extremely close to algebraic geometry, which deals just with polynomial
functions (with complex coefficients). Pictorially:
8 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Map(C,C)‚äÉC 0(C,C)‚äÉC 1(C,C)‚äÉ. . .‚äÉC ‚àû(C,C)‚äÉ O(C)‚äÉC[T]‚äÉZ[T]
This goes from arbitrary maps (‚Äúset theory‚Äù) to continuous maps (‚Äútopology‚Äù) to differen-
tiable functions (‚Äúanalysis‚Äù) to smooth functions (‚Äúdifferential geometry‚Äù) to holomorphic func-
tions (‚Äúcomplex analysis‚Äù) to complex polynomials (‚Äúalgebraic geometry‚Äù) to integer polynomials
(‚Äúarithmetic geometry‚Äù). Historically (at least on a very superficial level), the development started
with some class of differentiable functions, implicit in the first works on analysis, and then pro-
ceeded rightwards by putting more and more stringent conditions. Proceeding along those lines,
however, made functions much more into formulas ‚Äì any element ofZ[T] is just something like
3T 4 + 7T‚àí4, and in fact can be evaluated not just inC, but in any field, for exampleF p.
Traditionally, objects on the right are considered more complicated than objects towards the
left. We will take the opposite point of view ‚Äì what could be simpler than polynomials with integer
coefficients? (Indeed, these are the simplest kinds of commutative rings.) Thus, we will start from
Z[T] and try to get toC[T] andO(D) in a ‚Äúformal nonsense‚Äù manner ‚Äì i.e., we want to find ways
to freely adjoint the ‚Äúcorrect‚Äù convergent power series.
In other words, we need a way to ‚Äúformally‚Äù adjoin convergent sums. This is formalized in
the notion of an ‚Äúanalytic ring‚Äù developed in [Sch19] and [Sch20]. The idea is the following. An
analytic ring should be a topological ringAtogether with a certain (topological)A-module
Summable(N, A)‚äÇA N
of ‚Äúsummable‚Äù sequences, such that, for any null-sequencea 0, a1, . . . , an, . . .‚ààA, encoded in a
continuous map
f:N‚à™ {‚àû} ‚ÜíA
(withf(‚àû) = 0), and any summable sequence (x 0, x1, . . . , xn, . . .)‚ààSummable(N, A), one can form
a new element
‚àûX
n=0
xnan ‚ààA.
In other words, any continuous mapf:N‚à™ {‚àû} ‚ÜíAwithf(‚àû) = 0 should extend uniquely
to a continuous map
ef: Summable(N, A)‚ÜíA.
It turns out that it‚Äôs more convenient to generalize convergent sequences (for example, in general
continuity cannot be checked in terms of convergent sequences). Namely,N‚à™ ‚àûis a special kind of
profinite setS(recall that profinite sets are also known as totally disconnected compact Hausdorff
spaces). One should define for any profinite setSa topologicalA-moduleM A(S) of ‚ÄúA-valued
measures onS‚Äù, with a mapS‚Üí M A(S) sending anys‚ààSto the ‚ÄúDirac measure‚ÄùŒ¥ s ‚àà M A(S),
such that for any continuous mapf:S‚ÜíA, there is a unique extension
ef:M A(S)‚ÜíA:Œº7‚Üí
Z
f Œº.
In other words, an analytic ringAis roughly the datum of a topological ringA, together with
a topologicalA-moduleM A(S) for any profinite setS, satisfying some compatibilities. One would
like the basic example to beA=R, withM R(S) given by the space of Radon measures, i.e.
MR(S) = Homcont
R (Cont(S,R),R).
1. LECTURE I: INTRODUCTION 9
Unfortunately, as we will discuss below, this will not define an example of an analytic ring, due to
some subtle behaviour of the real numbers. But similar constructions carried overZorZ p (for a
primep) do give very interesting examples of analytic rings, discussed in [Sch19].
We note that any analytic ringAwill in fact give rise to a notion of ‚Äúcomplete‚Äù topological
A-modulesM. Namely,Mis complete if for anyf:S‚ÜíMas before, there is a unique extension
ef:M A(S)‚ÜíM:Œº7‚Üí
Z
f Œº.
Example1.2.LetA=RwithM R(S) given by the space of Radon measures as above. Then
for any complete locally convex topologicalR-vector spaceV, any mapf:S‚ÜíVextends uniquely
to a map
ef:M R(S)‚ÜíV:Œº7‚Üí
Z
f Œº.
On the other hand, we would like to use the very categorical methods of algebraic geometry
in this setting of analytic rings. In particular, we would like to work in the setting of abelian
categories.
Problem1.3.Topological abelian groups do not form an abelian category!
The issue is very basic. Indeed, consider the map
Rdisc ‚ÜíR nat
fromRwith the discrete topology toRwith its natural topology. This has trivial kernel, trivial
cokernel, but is not an isomorphism. This happens in fact whenever one equips an abelian group
Mwith two distinct topologies, one finer than the other, so it is an extremely pervasive problem.
On the other hand, in the presentation above, we started to look at topological abelian groups
Monly in terms of the corresponding functor
M : ProFinop ‚ÜíAb :S7‚ÜíCont(S, M)
taking any profinite setSto the continuous maps fromStoM. This will be an example of a
condensed abelian group, which is just a functor
ProFinop ‚ÜíAb
satisfying some simple axioms.
Condensed abelian groups form an abelian category! For example, there is a short exact se-
quence
0‚ÜíR disc ‚ÜíR nat ‚ÜíQ‚Üí0
whereQis the condensed abelian group given by the functor
Q(S) = Cont(S,R)/LocConst(S,R).
Note that the ‚Äúunderlying abelian group‚ÄùQ(‚àó) = 0, but stillQÃ∏= 0 asQ(S)Ã∏= 0 for infinite
profinite sets ‚Äì for example, takingS=N‚à™ {‚àû}, not every convergent sequence inRis eventually
constant.
Just like condensed abelian groups, one can define condensed sets, as functors ProFin op ‚ÜíSet,
satisfying some simple conditions (recalled in the next lecture). There is a functor
Top‚ÜíCond :X7‚Üí(X :S7‚ÜíCont(S, X)).
10 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Restricted to compactly generated spaces, this functor is fully faithful, so in practice condensed
sets are an enlargement of topological spaces. But there are many more objects in Cond; notably,
nonseparated quotient objects.
Definition1.4 (slightly preliminary).An analytic ring is a condensed ringAtogether with a
condensedA-moduleM A(S) for any profinite setS, with a mapS‚Üí M A(S) of ‚ÄúDirac measures‚Äù,
subject to some compatibility. In particular, the full subcategory
{MA-complete condensedA-modules} ‚äÇCond(A),
of those condensedA-modulesMsuch that for allSand allf:S‚ÜíM, there is a unique extension
ef:M A(S)‚ÜíM, should be an abelian subcategory of Cond(A), stable under extensions.
We can now explain whyR(orR ‚Äì we will soon become lax with our use of underlines, treating
everything as condensed from the start...) equipped with the spaces of signed Radon measures is
not an analytic ring.
Example1.5.For anyp‚àà[1,‚àû], letl p(N) be the Banach space ofp-summable sequences
(x0, x1, . . .) of real numbers, equipped with thel p-norm
||(xn)n||lp = (
X
n
|xn|p)1/p.
Thenl 1(N)‚äÇl 2(N) with dense image; in condensedR -vector spaces, we can pass to the quotient:
0‚Üíl 1(N) ‚Üíl 2(N) ‚ÜíQ‚Üí0.
Now consider the (non-linear) map
g:l 1(N)‚Üíl 2(N) : (xn)n 7‚Üí(x n log|x n|)n.
It turns out that the composite
g:l 1(N)
g
‚àí ‚Üíl2(N) ‚ÜíQ
is a (nonzero) map of condensedR -vector spaces. On the other hand, restricted to the basis vectors,
the map is identically 0. In other words, the sequence
N‚à™ {‚àû} ‚ÜíQ
that is constant 0 admits two distinct extensions to the space of summable sequencesl 1(N) (which
is basicallyM R(N‚à™ {‚àû})): The map that is constant 0, and g. That is,Qis notM R-complete,
contrary to the requirement put in Definition 1.4.
2. LECTURE II: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 11
2. Lecture II: Liquid vector spaces
Recall from the previous lecture that our first goal is to produce a sheafOofR-vector spaces
on the topological spaceC, whose value on the diskD=D(x, r) of radiusr >0 centered at a point
x‚ààCis given by
O(D) ={
‚àûX
n=0
an(T‚àíx) n |a n ‚ààC,‚àÄr ‚Ä≤ < r, anr‚Ä≤n ‚Üí0}.
Moreover, we want to see thatOhas no higher cohomology on these disksD, so that this description
of the sections is ‚Äúrobust‚Äù.
As described in the previous lecture, we will approach this old result by new methods, which are
much more algebraic in nature as opposed to analytic. For this, the first step is to recognize more
structure on these vector spaces of sections. In fact, we need to promoteO(D) to an object of an
abelian tensor category, such that this promotion in some sense encodes a structure of topological
vector space onO(D). The category being abelian is useful in order to control sheaf cohomology;
and the tensor product, though its use is not a priori obvious, is actually also crucial for our
approach.
The purpose of this lecture is to introduce the required abelian tensor category, whose objects
are known asp-liquid vector spaces.
As mentioned, the idea is that we want to encode a topological vector space structure on
O(D). However, as indicated in the previous lecture, the formalism of topological vector spaces is
not appropriate, because topological spaces don‚Äôt mix well with algebra: in particular, topological
abelian groups do not form an abelian category.
The solution is to find a replacement for the very notion of topological space, one for which
it is much more convenient to add on algebraic structures such as that of a vector space. This
replacement is known ascondensed set.
The building blocks for condensed sets are the following very special kinds of topological spaces.
Definition2.1.Let Prof denote the category of compact Hausdorff totally disconnected topo-
logical spaces.
There are several useful characterizations of this class of topological spaces. We have that
S‚ààProf if and only ifSis compact Hausdorff and there is a basis for the topology ofSconsisting
ofclopensubsets. Another equivalent condition is thatSshould be homeomorphic to some inverse
limit of finite discrete spaces:
S= lim‚Üê ‚àíi‚ààI
Si.
In fact, there is a canonical choice for this inverse limit diagram: we can takeIto be the set of
disjoint union decompositions ofSinto (finitely many) nonempty clopen subsets, with partial order
given by refinement. Equivalently, an element ofIis an isomorphism class of continuous surjections
S‚ÜÝS i withS i a finite discrete space, and this shows how to build the inverse limit diagram.
This canonical index diagram is cofiltered, so everyS‚ààProf is a cofiltered inverse limit of finite
sets. In fact, this yields an equivalence of categories
Prof‚âÉPro(finiteSets)
12 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
with the Pro-category of finite sets, giving a ‚Äúcombinatorial‚Äù as opposed to topological description
of our basic building blocks. For this reason, objects of Prof are called simplyprofinite setsfor
short.
More general condensed sets will be glued from objects of Prof via the formalism of sheaves.
To implement this, we consider the following finitary Grothendieck topology on Prof.
Definition2.2.A finite collection (f i :S i ‚ÜíS) i‚ààI of maps in Prof with common codomain is
called acoveringif the induced map G
i‚ààI
Si ‚ÜÝS
is surjective.
The category Prof has all pullbacks (in fact, all limits), and it is trivial to check the axioms of a
Grothendieck topology. However, before we use this to define a category of sheaves, we need to get
around the technical difficulty that Prof is not essentially small. For this we introduce a ‚Äúcutoff‚Äù
cardinalŒ∫, which we assume to be infinite.
Definition2.3.A profinite setSis calledŒ∫-smallif the set of clopen subsets ofShas cardi-
nality< Œ∫. The full subcategory ofŒ∫-small profinite sets is denoted
Prof Œ∫ ‚äÇProf.
We can restrict the Grothendieck topology on Prof to Prof Œ∫, and then make the following
definition.
Definition2.4.AŒ∫-condensed setis a sheaf of sets on Prof Œ∫. The category ofŒ∫-condensed
sets is denoted by CondSet Œ∫.
Explicitly, anX‚ààCondSet Œ∫ is a functor
X: Prof op
Œ∫ ‚ÜíSet
such that:
(1) If (S i)i‚ààI is a finite collection of objects of Prof op
Œ∫ , then
X(
G
i‚ààI
Si) ‚àº‚Üí
Y
i‚ààI
X(S i);
(2) Iff:T‚ÜÝSis a surjective map in Prof Œ∫, then
X(S)
f ‚àó
,‚ÜíX(T)
is injective with image equal to the set of thosex‚ààX(T) for whichp ‚àó
1x=p ‚àó
2x, where
p1, p2 :T√ó S T‚ÜíTare the two projections.
There are two ways of thinking about this definition. The first is that instead of encoding a
topological space structure onXdirectly, we encode, for everyS‚ààProf, the data of an abstract
setX(S) which we think of as specifying the set of ‚Äúcontinuous maps fromStoX‚Äù. From this
perspective, the above structure and conditions should make intuitive sense:
(1) the contravariant functorialityX: Prof op
Œ∫ ‚ÜíSetcomes from the idea that a ‚Äúcontinuous
map‚ÄùS‚ÜíXand a continuous mapT‚ÜíSshould compose to give a ‚Äúcontinuous map‚Äù
T‚ÜíX;
2. LECTURE II: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 13
(2) the first axiom encodes that giving a ‚Äúcontinuous map‚Äù out of a disjoint union should be
the same as separately giving a ‚Äúcontinuous map‚Äù out of each constituent piece;
(3) the second axiom encodes that iff:T‚ÜÝS, then giving a ‚Äúcontinuous map‚Äù out ofS
should be the same as giving a ‚Äúcontinuous map‚Äù out ofTwhich is constant on the fibers
off.
To make this last point more palatable, note that a continuous surjection between compact Haus-
dorff spaces is a topological quotient map.
The other way of think about this definition, actually equivalent to the first though perhaps
psychologically different, comes back to the idea that profinite sets are the building blocks for
arbitrary condensed sets. More formally, the Yoneda embedding gives a fully faithful functor
Prof Œ∫ ,‚ÜíCondSet Œ∫
defined by
S7‚Üí(S :T7‚ÜíCont(T, S)),
allowing us to viewŒ∫-small profinite sets as special kinds ofŒ∫-condensed sets; and an arbitrary
Œ∫-condensed set is built fromŒ∫-small profinite sets via colimits in CondSet Œ∫.
From this perspective, the role of the sheaf conditions is perhaps a bit more tangible. If
we had used the presheaf category instead of sheaf category in the definition, then CondSet Œ∫
would befreelygenerated under colimits by Prof Œ∫, so every relation between colimits would be
essentially diagrammatic in nature. The role of the sheaf conditions is to enforce that certain
colimits we already have in Prof Œ∫ should be preserved by the Yoneda embedding, and thus be
visible in CondSet Œ∫. Indeed:
(1) the first sheaf condition says that given finitely many profinite setsS i, we have
G
Si
‚àº‚Üí
G
Si;
(2) the second sheaf condition says that that ifT‚ÜÝS, thereby presentingSas the quotient
ofTby the equivalence relationT√ó S T, thenS is the quotient ofT by the equivalence
relationT√ó S T .
Carrying around the cardinalŒ∫is sometimes a bit annoying. IfŒ∫ < Œ∫ ‚Ä≤, then there is a pullback
functor
œÄ‚àó : CondSetŒ∫ ‚ÜíCondSet Œ∫‚Ä≤,
characterized by the fact that it preserves colimits and restricts to the obvious inclusion Prof Œ∫ ‚Üí
Prof Œ∫‚Ä≤ under the Yoneda embeddings. Now it turns out that, forŒ∫andŒ∫ ‚Ä≤ restricted to a cofinal
class of cardinals (e.g., strong limit cardinals of sufficiently large cofinality), the functorœÄ ‚àó is fully
faithful and preserves limits and internal hom‚Äôs of any fixed size. This means that the colimit
category
CondSet := lim‚àí ‚ÜíŒ∫
CondSetŒ∫
ofcondensed setsis just as well-behaved as each individual CondSet Œ∫ in terms of its topos-theoretic
exactness properties, because calculations can always be done at some ‚Äúfinite‚Äù level. Moreover,
CondSet is generated under colimits by arbitrary profinite sets in the same way CondSet Œ∫ is gen-
erated under colimits byŒ∫-small profinite sets.
Let‚Äôs try to understand a bit about what condensed sets can look like by carving out a hierarchy
of full subcategories of CondSet:
14 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
qcProj‚äÇProf‚äÇqcqs‚äÇqs‚äÇCondSet.
We already know about Prof: these were our basic building blocks, the profinite sets. The
other three full subcategories are given by some general properties an object in a topos can have.
We review the relevant definitions in the current context.
Definition2.5.A condensed setXis calledquasicompactorqcfor short if for all collections
(Xi ‚ÜíX) i‚ààI of maps of condensed sets with targetX, indexed by an arbitrary setI, it holds that
if G
i
Xi ‚ÜÝX,
then there exists a finite subsetI 0 ‚äÇIsuch thatG
i‚ààI0
Xi ‚ÜÝX.
Since CondSet is generated by Prof, everyX‚ààCondSet admits a surjection from a coproduct
of profinite sets, and it follows that in the above definition we could restrict to the case where all
Xi are profinite without any change in the resulting notion. Since the Grothendieck topology on
Prof is finitary, every profinite set is itself quasicompact, and in fact we find that anX‚ààCondSet
is quasicompact if and only if there exists anS‚ààProf and a surjection
S‚ÜÝX.
Thus, a condensed set is qc if and only if it is a quotient of a profinite set. However, this
quotient can be quite arbitrary, and in particular non-Hausdorff: an example isX=R/R Œ¥ from
the previous lecture. This is a quotient ofR/Z, which is in turn a quotient of the profinite setQ
N{0,1}via binary expansions.
The next condition rules out such non-Hausdorff behavior.
Definition2.6.A condensed setXis calledquasiseparatedorqsfor short if the diagonal map
X‚ÜíX√óXis quasicompact, meaning for allS‚ààProf and all pairs of mapsf, g:S‚ÜíX, the
condensed setS√ó X Sis quasicompact.
This is the analog of the Hausdorff condition for condensed sets. Indeed, a topological space is
Hausdorff if and only if the diagonal is a closed inclusion; but on the other hand, the condition in
the above definition thatS√ó X Sbe quasicompact is equivalent to the condition that the inclusion
S√ó X S‚äÇS√óSbe represented by a closed subset of the topological spaceS√óS, thanks to the
following lemma, whose proof we include to give a feel for this kind of elementary argument.
Lemma2.7.LetS‚ààProf. For an arbitrary condensed subsetT‚äÇS, we have thatTis qc‚áî
Tis represented by a closed subset ofS‚áîT‚ààProf.
Proof.The nontrivial implication is thatTqc‚áíTis represented by a closed subset ofS. If
Tis qc, we can choose anS ‚Ä≤ ‚ààProf and a surjectionS ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜÝT. The composition
f:S ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜÝT‚äÇS
is a map between objects of Prof. Letf(S ‚Ä≤) denote the topological space image of this map of
compact Hausdorff spaces. Thenf(S ‚Ä≤) is closed inS, so it suffices to show thatf(S ‚Ä≤) =Tas
subobjects ofS. However,f(S ‚Ä≤) is the quotient ofS ‚Ä≤ by the equivalence relationS ‚Ä≤ √óf(S ‚Ä≤) S‚Ä≤ in
2. LECTURE II: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 15
CondSet by definition of the Grothendieck topology. On the other hand,S ‚Ä≤ √óf(S ‚Ä≤) S‚Ä≤ =S ‚Ä≤ √óT S‚Ä≤
becauseT, f(S ‚Ä≤)‚äÇS, andTis the quotient ofS ‚Ä≤ byS ‚Ä≤ √óT S‚Ä≤ on completely general topos-theoretic
grounds. ‚ñ°
Having the notions of qc and qs, we get the notion of qcqs: a condensed set is qcqs if it is both
qc and qs. This is the topos-theoretic analog of compact Hausdorff; but in fact, in this case it is
much more than an analogy.
Proposition2.8.The full subcategoryqcqs‚äÇCondSetis equivalent to the categoryCHausof
compact Hausdorff spaces.
The idea behind this equivalence is that both qcqs condensed sets and compact Hausdorff
spaces can be described in terms of profinite sets in exactly the same way: they are quotients of
profinite sets by closed (equivalently, profinite) equivalence relations. The functor CHaus ‚àº‚Üíqcqs
implementing this equivalence is also just the usual way
X7‚Üí(X :S7‚ÜíCont(S, X))
of assigning a condensed set to a topological space, and the functor backwards can be described as
sending a qcqsXto its underlying setX(‚àó) equipped with the topology where the closed subsets
are those of the formY(‚àó) for some qc condensed subsetY‚äÇX.
We can also describe the more general quasiseparated condensed sets.
Proposition2.9.A condensed set isqsif and only if it is a filtered union ofqcqssubobjects.
The full subcategoryqs‚äÇCondSetis equivalent to the full subcategory category ofInd(CHaus)
consisting of those ind-compact Hausdorff spaces which can be represented by an ind-system with
injective transition maps.
The fully faithful functorX7‚ÜíX from compactly generated weak Hausdorff topological spaces
to condensed sets lands inside qs: it sendsXto the union of all its compact Hausdorff subsets,
viewing these as qcqs condensed sets. However, there are many more quasi-separated condensed
sets than just these: given a CGWH topological spaceX, we can take any family of compact
Hausdorff subsets ofXwhich is closed under finite union, and take the union in condensed sets
over just those instead. If that family of compact subsets still determines the topology ofX(for
example, ifXis metrizable and we take the family of countable compact subsets), this gives a new
qs condensed set which is, however, indistinguishable fromXfrom a topological perspective. In
fact, the notion of qs condensed set exactly matches the notion ofcompactological spacedeveloped
by Waelbrock, [Wae06].
Via this description in terms of ind-compact Hausdorff spaces, the qs condensed sets are fairly
accessible in standard topological terms. On the other hand, disjoint unions of profinite sets are
qs, and a subobject of a qs condensed set is qs. It follows that any condensed set is a quotient
of a qs condensed set by a qs equivalence relation. This gives some idea of the general nature of
condensed sets.
It remains to discuss the most special class qcProj of condensed sets, thequasicompact projective
objects.
Definition2.10.A condensed setXis calledprojectiveif for allY‚ààCondSet, every surjection
Y‚ÜÝXadmits a section.
16 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Equivalently,Xis projective if for all surjectionsA‚ÜÝBof condensed sets, the induced map
A(X)‚ÜÝB(X) is a surjective map of sets.
A condensed set is quasicompact projective if it is both quasicompact and projective. Such an
X, being quasicompact, admits a surjection from a profinite set; being projective, this surjection
splits, soXis a retract of a profinite set, and hence itself is a profinite set. Thus we see that qc
projective condensed sets are the same thing as projective profinite sets: profinite setsSsuch that
for every surjectionS ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜÝSof profinite sets splits.
These are the same as theextremally disconnectedprofinite sets studied by Gleason in [Gle58].
The main result on them is that there are ‚Äúenough‚Äù extremally disconnected profinite sets:
Lemma2.11.For everyS‚ààProf, there is a projectiveS ‚Ä≤ ‚ààProfwith a surjectionS ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜÝS.
Proof.We takeS ‚Ä≤ =Œ≤S Œ¥, the Stone-Cech compactification of the underlying set ofS. The
universal property of Stone-Cech compactification gives both the required surjection and the proof
thatS ‚Ä≤ is projective. ‚ñ°
This means that the projective profinite sets also generate the category of condensed sets. In
some ways they are a more convenient set of generators, because of their projectivity. For example,
a mapX‚ÜíYof condensed sets is surjective (resp. injective, resp. an isomorphism) if and only if
X(S)‚ÜíY(S) is surjective (resp. injective, resp. an isomorphism) as a map of sets, for all projective
profiniteS. For ‚Äúsurjective‚Äù, this fails on more general profinite sets.
Coming back to our cut-off cardinalsŒ∫, it is convenient to requireŒ∫to be a strong limit
cardinal (S < Œ∫‚áí2 S < Œ∫), because then the above lemma also holds inside Prof Œ∫. Moreover, then
Œ∫-smallness for a profinite set as defined above is equivalent to underlying set beingŒ∫-small. In fact,
for all practical purposes we know, nothing would be lost by restricting the theory to CondSet Œ∫
forŒ∫equal to the first uncountable strong limit cardinal, the supremum of finite iterations of the
power set function applied to the natural numbers.
These projective profinite sets, though they never show up in practice as explicit objects of
interest, are very convenient abstract entities to have around when discussing the homological
algebra ofcondensed abelian groups, which constitute our next topic.
Definition2.12.Acondensed abelian groupis an abelian group object of CondSet, or equiv-
alently, a sheaf of abelian groups on Prof Œ∫ for someŒ∫. The category of condensed abelian groups
is denoted CondAb.
General topos-theoretic considerations show that CondAb is an abelian category with all limits
and colimits, and that filtered colimits in CondAb are exact. However, due to the existence of
enough qc projective profinite sets, we get even better exactness properties. IfS‚ààqcProj, then
the free condensed abelian group onS
Z[S]
is acompact projectiveobject of the abelian category CondAb. This means that
HomCondAb(Z[S],‚àí) : CondAb‚ÜíAb
commutes with both filtered colimits and cokernels. It follows that it in fact commutes with all
colimits. It also obviously commutes with all limits, so it commutes with both limits and colimits.
Moreover, theseZ[S] forS‚ààqcProj provide enough compact projectives to generate CondAb.
This can be expressed in two equivalent ways:
2. LECTURE II: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 17
(1) a mapf:A‚ÜíBof condensed abelian groups is an isomorphism if and only if Hom(Z[S], A)‚Üí
Hom(Z[S], B) is an isomorphism for allS‚ààqcProj;
(2) every condensed abelian group is isomorphic to a cokernel of a map between direct sums
of condensed abelian groups of the formZ[S].
From this we deduce that CondAb inherits all the exactness properties of Ab. Indeed, any
question about interchanging limits and colimits in CondAb can be tested on Hom‚Äôs out of the
Z[S], and then it reduces to the same claim in Ab. In particular, infinite products are exact, a
feature not shared by abelian group objects in most toposes.
Now we can finally discuss our main objects of study: theliquid vector spaces. As mentioned
in the previous lecture, the idea is that we want to restrict to a certain class of condensed abelian
groups, which we consider to be ‚Äúcomplete‚Äù real vector spaces in some sense. And this completeness
is expressed in terms of the existence and uniqueness of certain infinite sums, or more precisely,
integrals of continuous functions along measures.
We start with the set of (signed) Radon measuresM(S) on a profinite setS. In the previous
lecture this was defined as the continuous dual ofC(S;R), the Banach space of continuous functions
onS. But for our purposes it will be convenient to introduce an alternate more direct perspective
onM(S).
Classically, a measure assigns to every Borel subset ofSa real number, such that certain
axioms are satisfied, in particular countable additivity and bounded variation. But for profinite
S, the description simplifies considerably: it suffices to specify the measureŒº(T) only for clopen
subsets ofS, and then only finite additivity and bounded variation need to be imposed. That is,
M(S)‚äÇ {Œº: Clopen(S)‚ÜíR|Œº(‚àÖ) = 0, Œº(T‚äîT ‚Ä≤) =Œº(T) +Œº(T ‚Ä≤)}
is given byM(S) = S
C>0 M(S)‚â§C, where
M(S)‚â§C ={Œº| |Œº(T 1)|+. . .+|Œº(T n)| ‚â§CifS=T 1 ‚äî. . .‚äîT n}.
There is another way of organizing this definition, using the presentationS= lim‚Üê ‚àíi Si ofSas a
filtered inverse limit of finite sets, namely
M(S)‚â§C = lim‚Üê ‚àíi
M(Si)‚â§C ‚äÇlim‚Üê ‚àíi
R‚äïSi,
whereM(S i)‚â§C is the closed ball of radiusCcentered at the origin with respect to thel 1-norm on
R‚äïSi. This also describesM(S) as a qs condensed set: it is the sequential union of theM(S) ‚â§C,
which are compact Hausdorff spaces, being inverse limits of closed balls in finite-dimensional spaces.
The appearance of thel 1-norm here is necessary to makeM(S) match the dual of continuous
functions, but in this last presentation there‚Äôs nothing to suggest we couldn‚Äôt use a different norm.
In fact this freedom of changing norms will be crucial for us.
More precisely, for 0< p‚â§1, we can consider thel p-norm onR S for a finite setS, defined by
‚à•(xs)s‚ààS‚à•p =
X
s‚ààS
|xs|p.
This norm still satisfies the triangle inequality (this usesp‚â§1). Note that the closed disk of radius
Cin thel p norm is smaller than in thel 1-norm, so we will be shrinking our space of measures.
More drastically, forp <1 the closed disks in thel p norm are no longer convex! This constitutes a
more radical departure from standard functional analysis, which makes extensive use of convexity.
18 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
However, nonconvex functional analysis has been studied to some extent, with Kalton in particular
proving some interesting and nontrivial results which we used as inspiration, see [Kal81].
Anyway, we can consider
Mp(S) =
[
C>0
M(S)lp‚â§C,
where
M(S)lp‚â§C = lim‚Üê ‚àíi
M(Si)lp‚â§C ‚äÇlim‚Üê ‚àíi
R‚äïSi,
in perfect analogy to the above. In other words, instead of measures of bounded variation, we
take measures of boundedp-variation. However, we cannot directly use this space of measures for
definingp-liquid vector spaces either, because of similar phenomena as given in Example 1.5 of the
previous lecture. Instead, we need to fix a 0< p‚â§1, and then consider
M<p(S) =
[
q<p
Mq(S).
Note that there is a natural inclusionS‚Üí M <p(S) of condensed sets, singling out the Dirac
measures (unit coordinate vectors in the finite-dimensional approximations in the above definitions).
With this space of measures in place, we make the main definition.
Definition2.13.LetV‚ààCondAb and 0< p‚â§1. We say thatVisp-liquidif for every
S‚ààProf and every map of condensed setsf:S‚ÜíV, there is a unique map of condensed abelian
groups ef:M <p(S)‚ÜíVsuch that ef| S =f.
In the next lecture, we will state the main theorem onp-liquid condensed abelian groups,
which implies that they form a very robust abelian subcategory of condensed abelian groups; and
moreover, everyp-liquid condensed abelian group has a unique and functorial structure of condensed
R-module. But first, we want to explore the meaning of this definition by specializing it to the case
of quasi-separatedV. The result is the following.
Theorem2.14.LetVbe a qs condensedR-module and0< p‚â§1. ThenVisp-liquid if and
only if for everyq < p, every quasicompact subobject ofVis contained in a quasicompactq-convex
subobject ofV.
A quasi-compact subobjectKof a qs condensedR-module is said to beq-convexif for all finite
setsS, the map
(R‚äïS)lq‚â§1 √óK S ‚ÜíV,
((Œªs),(x s))7‚Üí
X
s
Œªsxs,
lands insideK. Ifq= 1, this is the usual notion of absolute convexity.
Recall that a qc subobject of a qs condensed set is qcqs, hence corresponds to a compact
Hausdorff space. In particular, the aboveq-convexity onKis really a pointwise condition. In
essence, the theorem says that ap-liquid qs condensedR-module is one which can be exhausted by
q-convex compact Hausdorff subobjects, for allq < p.
One implication in the above theorem is easy to prove:
2. LECTURE II: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 19
Proof.SupposeVisp-liquid, and letKbe a quasicompact subobject ofV. Choose a surjection
S‚ÜÝKwithS‚ààProf. By definition ofp-liquid, the compositef:S‚ÜíK‚äÇVextends to a map
of condensed abelian groups fromM q(S) for allq < p. Note that this extended map is necessarily
R-linear, because we can test this on the compact Hausdorff subobjectsM(S) lq‚â§C and then argue
pointwise using the density ofQinR. On the other hand, from the definitions we see that the
quasicompact subset
M(S)lq‚â§1 ‚äÇ M q(S)
isq-convex. It follows that its image under theR-linear mapM q(S)‚ÜíVis also quasicompact
andq-convex. Since it clearly containsK, this proves one direction of the above theorem.‚ñ°
The other implication is a bit more tricky, and the argument can be found in the appendix.
Thus we have a convenient criterion for a qs condensedR-module to bep-liquid. We can
use this to produce some examples. First of all, the spacesM <p(S) themselves clearly satisfy
the hypotheses, so they are themselvesp-liquid. They are the most basic examples, being (by
definition!) the freep-liquid vector spaces on the profinite setsS.
But there is another class of examples, closely related to classical functional analysis, which also
play an important role in our theory. These are theBanach spaces, or more generallyp-Banach
spaces for our fixed 0< p‚â§1.
Definition2.15.Let 0< p‚â§1. For an abstractR-vector spaceV, ap-normonVis a map
‚à•¬∑‚à•:V‚ÜíR ‚â•0
such that:
(1)‚à•v‚à•= 0‚áîv= 0 forv‚ààV;
(2)‚à•v+w‚à• ‚â§ ‚à•v‚à•+‚à•w‚à•forv, w‚ààV;
(3)‚à•Œªv‚à•=|Œª| p‚à•v‚à•forv‚ààV,Œª‚ààR.
Such ap-norm induces a topological vector space structure onV, and those topological vector
spaces which arise fromp-norms onVfor whichViscompleteare calledp-Banach spaces.
Note that ifq < pandVisp-Banach, then it is alsoq-Banach: we can replace the norm by
‚à•¬∑‚à•q/p without affecting the topology. In particular, every Banach space, which is a 1-Banach space
in the above terminology, is alsop-Banach for allp.
By definition the topology of ap-Banach space is sequential, hence compactly generated, so
we can equivalently encode ap-BanachVin terms of its associated condensedR-vector space. We
claim that anyp-Banach isp-liquid. To prove this, and for other purposes, it‚Äôs nice to have control
over compact subsets ofp-Banach spaces. Good information is provided by the following lemma of
Grothendieck, [Gro55] p. 112:
Lemma2.16.Let0< p‚â§1, and letVbe ap-Banach space. Then:
(1) Every compact subset ofVis contained in the closure of thep-convex hull of a nullsequence.
(2) The closure of thep-convex hull of any nullsequence is compact (andp-convex).
Evidently, this implies that ap-Banach space isp-liquid, given the criterion provided by the
above theorem. Since arbitrary inverse limits ofp-liquid spaces arep-liquid, we deduce that arbi-
trary inverse limits ofp-Banach spaces arep-liquid. This covers the condensedR-modules associated
to arbitrarycomplete locallyp-convextopological vector spaces, showing that the most classical
notion of completeness in functional analysis does yield condensed vector spaces which are complete
20 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
in our sense, i.e.p-liquid.
But besides the desire to connect with classical functional analysis, there is another reason for
us to studyp-Banach spaces, or rather simply ordinary Banach spaces: it turns out they also play
a foundational role in our theory. This is for the following two reasons:
(1) As mentioned, the most fundamentalp-liquid vector spaces are the measure spacesM<p(S),
and these are far from being Banach. (They are countable unions of compact subsets, which
only happens for finite-dimensional Banach spaces.) However, theirdual, i.e. internal Hom
toR, identifies with the Banach spaceC(S;R) of continuous mapsS‚ÜíR, and these duals
play an important role.
(2) It turns out that Banach spaces have many convenient calculational properties which are
not shared by theM <p(S), so for some arguments it is preferable to build more compli-
catedp-liquid spaces from Banach spaces instead of spaces of measures. We will see some
examples in the coming lectures.
Exercise 1.Recall that an objectXof a categoryCis said to becompactif the functor
Hom(X;‚àí) :C ‚ÜíSet commutes with filtered colimits. ForX‚ààCondSet, show that there are
implications
Xqcqs‚áíXcompact‚áíXquasicompact.
Exercise 2.Find examples showing that neither implication in the previous exercise is re-
versible.
Exercise 3.Let{U i}i‚ààI be an arbitrary open cover of a topological spaceX. Show thatX is
the quotient of F
i Ui by the equivalence relation F
i,j Ui ‚à©U j in CondSetŒ∫ for allŒ∫.
Exercise 4.Let 0< p‚â§1. SupposeVis a qs condensedR-vector space andK‚äÇVis a qc
p-convex subset such thatV=R¬∑K. Define ap-norm onV(‚àó) such thatK(‚àó) is the closed unit
ball and show thatV(‚àó) is complete with respect to thisp-norm, thus giving a new qs condensed
R-vector spaceV Banp. Show that there is an injective map of condensedR-vector spaces
V Banp ‚ÜíV
which is the identity on‚àó-valued points, and is natural inVas a condensedR-vector space.
APPENDIX TO LECTURE II: QUASISEPARATED LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 21
Appendix to Lecture II: Quasiseparated liquid vector spaces
In this appendix, we prove the converse direction in Theorem 2.14. We will use the following
lemma.
Lemma2.17.LetTbe a compact Hausdorff space,0< p‚â§1, andK‚äÇVa quasicompact
p-convex subobject of a qs condensedR-moduleV. Then:
(1) T
Œª>0 Œª¬∑K={0};
(2) for any sequencef 1, f2 . . .of continuous mapsT‚ÜíK, if there is a nullsequenceŒª 1, Œª2 . . .
of positive real numbers such thatf n(t)‚àíf m(t)‚ààŒª n ¬∑Kfor allt‚ààTandn‚â§m, then the
fn converge pointwise to a continuous map
f‚àû :T‚ÜíK.
Proof.For (1), letv‚àà T
Œª>0 Œª¬∑K. ThenR¬∑v‚äÇK. Hence the closure ofR¬∑vis a compact
Hausdorff topologicalR-vector space. But the only such is 0: for example, by Pontryagin duality
this is equivalent to the fact that a discrete topologicalR-vector space must be 0.
For (2), sinceKis compact Hausdorff, we can extend the mapf:T√óN‚ÜíKdefined by
f(t, n) =f n(t) to the Stone-Cech compactification:
ef:Œ≤(T√óN)‚ÜíK.
Recall thatŒ≤(T√óN) is a compact Hausdorff space containingT√óNas a dense subspace. We will
show that this effactors through the more refined compactificationT√ó(N‚à™ ‚àû), giving the claim.
As surjective maps of compact Hausdorff spaces are quotient maps, it suffices to check this
pointwise. The subsets of the formT ‚Ä≤ √óN ‚â•N ‚äÇT√óN, forT ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇTa compact neighborhood oft
andN‚ààN, are the intersections withT√óNof a fundamental system of neighborhoods oft√ó ‚àû
inT√ó(N‚à™ ‚àû), so it suffices to show that
\
T ‚Ä≤,N
f(T ‚Ä≤ √óN ‚â•N)
consists of a single point ofK(which will give the value ef(t,‚àû)).
However, from the hypothesis we have for fixedNthat
f(T ‚Ä≤ √óN ‚â•N)‚äÇf N(T ‚Ä≤) +Œª N ¬∑K.
The latter subset is compact, and taking the intersection overT ‚Ä≤ we deduce that
\
T ‚Ä≤
f(T ‚Ä≤ √óN ‚â•N)‚äÇf N(t) +Œª N ¬∑K.
Ifvis any given limit point of the sequencef 1(t), f2(t), . . .inK, thenv‚àíf N(t) is a limit point of
thef n(t)‚àíf N(t), hence lies inŒª N ¬∑K. We deduce that
\
T ‚Ä≤
f(T ‚Ä≤ √óN ‚â•N)‚äÇv+Œª N ¬∑(K+K)
for allN. However,K+K‚äÇC¬∑Kfor someC >0 depending only onpbecause of thep-convexity
ofK. Thus, intersecting over allNand using part (1), we deduce the claim.‚ñ°
22 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Now we turn to the proof of the reverse direction of Theorem 2.14: ifVis a qs condensedR-
module which is exhausted by quasicompactq-convex subobjects for allq < p, thenVisp-liquid.
The difficulty is that we will need to understand how to build maps out of these spaces of measures
Mq(S). For this, we will make use of thediscretizationofM q(S) described in [Sch20, Lecture
VI], based on passing from the condensed ringRto the condensed ring
Z((T)) r
of Laurent series with integer coefficients which converge absolutely on the closed disk of radiusr,
for some fixed arbitraryr <1. For any 0< Œª < r, we get a surjective homomorphism
Z((T)) r ‚ÜíR
by plugging inT=Œª. One very relevant advantage ofZ((T)) r overRis that each element of
Z((T)) r iscanonicallya limit of elements of the discrete ringZ[T, T ‚àí1], given by truncating the
power series.
Quite remarkably, this also passes to spaces of measures. For a profinite setS, we have
M(S;Z((T)) r) =
[
C>0
M(S;Z((T)) r)‚â§C,
where
M(S;Z((T)) r)‚â§C ‚äÇ
Y
n‚ààZ
Z[S]¬∑T n
is the condensed ‚Äî in fact, profinite ‚Äî subset whoseS ‚Ä≤-valued points are specified pointwise, and
on a point are given by those X
n
cnT n, cn ‚ààZ[S]
such thatP
n‚à•cn‚à•l1rn ‚â§C. Then [Sch20, Proposition 6.9] says that there is a natural isomorphism
of condensedR-modules
M(S;Z((T)) r)‚äó Z((T)) r R=M q(S)
again induced by plugging inŒªforT. Here 0< q <1 is such thatŒª q =r.
Thus, to mapR-linearly out ofM q(S) is the same as mappingZ((T)) r-linearly out ofM(S;Z((T)) r),
and this can be easier because measures inM(S;Z((T)) r) arecanonicallylimits of finite sums of
Dirac measures with coefficients inZ[T, T ‚àí1]! We will use this in the following proof of the reverse
direction.
Proof.Suppose given a qs condensedR-vector spaceVsuch that for allq < p, every quasi-
compact subobject ofVis contained in a quasicompactq-convex subobject ofV. LetS‚ààProf
with a map
f:S‚ÜíV.
We want to extendfuniquely to a map ef:M <p(S)‚ÜíVof condensed abelian groups. First, note
that uniqueness is automatic, because the sums of Dirac measures withQ-coefficients are dense in
each qc subset ofM <p(S). Also for this reason, it suffices to show that for allq < p, the mapf
extends to anR-linear map
ef:M q(S)‚ÜíV.
APPENDIX TO LECTURE II: QUASISEPARATED LIQUID VECTOR SPACES 23
Now, the image offis a qc subset ofV, hence by assumption onVit lies in aq-convex subset.
Actually, it even lands in aq ‚Ä≤-convex qc subset for someq ‚Ä≤ > q. Thus it suffices to show that if
f:S‚ÜíVlands in aq ‚Ä≤-convex qc subsetK‚äÇV, then it extends toM q(S) for allq < q ‚Ä≤.
Now we use the trick of passing toM(S;Z((T)) r). By the above discussion, it suffices to
produce aZ((T)) r-linear map
M(S;Z((T)) r)‚ÜíV
which restricts tof, where the right-hand side is aZ((T)) r-module via evaluation atŒª=r 1/q. Now,
using density ofZ[T, T ‚àí1]-linear sums of Dirac measures in every qc subset ofM(S;Z((T)) r), the
Z((T)) r-linearity will be automatic if we just show that there exists a map of condensedsets
ef:M(S;Z((T)) r)‚ÜíV
such that on (Z[T, T ‚àí1])[S] it gives theZ[T, T ‚àí1]-linear extension off.
We produce this efas a limit of approximations. Forn‚â•0 we can consider the projection
M(S;Z((T)) r)‚Üí
M
i‚â§n
Z[S]¬∑T i
and compose with theZ[T, T ‚àí1]-linear map (Z[T, T ‚àí1])[S]‚ÜíVinduced byf:S‚ÜíVto deduce
mapsf n :M(S;Z((T)) r)‚ÜíVwhich we will claim converge to our desired ef.
Clearly, if we plug aZ[T, T ‚àí1]-linear sum of Dirac measures into thesef n, we get an eventually
constant sequence with the correct desired limit value. Using Lemma 2.17 applied to the source
compact Hausdorff spaceM(S;Z((T)) r)‚â§C for arbitraryC, to finish the proof it therefore suffices
to show two things: first,f n restricted toM(S;Z((T)) r)‚â§C lands in some constant multiple ofK,
and second, there is a nullsequence (Œª n) such that
fn ‚àíf m ‚ààŒª n ¬∑K
ifn‚â§m, again restricting toM(S;Z((T)) r)‚â§C.
To see thatf n restricted toM(S;Z((T)) r)‚â§C lands in some constant multiple ofK, recall that
M(S;Z((T)) r) goes toM q(S) under evaluationŒª=T, so the bound on the coefficients of the
finiteZ[T, T ‚àí1]-linear combination of Dirac measures inM(S;Z((T)) r) implies anl q-bound on the
R-coefficients once we plug inŒª. AsKisq ‚Ä≤-convex, it is alsoq-convex, so this implies that claim.
To see that there is a nullsequence (Œª n) as desired, note that fora >1 we have
(fm ‚àíf n)(
X
ciT i) =
X
n<i‚â§m
f(c i)Œªi =a ‚àín X
n<i‚â§m
f(c i)an‚àíi(aŒª)i
wherec i ‚ààZ[S] and we usefalso to denote theZ-linear extension off. But now we can choose
aso that evaluation atT=aŒªproduces the space ofq ‚Ä≤-measures fromM(S;Z((T)) r), instead of
q-measures as we got fromT=Œª, and we deduce the desired claim asa ‚àín is a nullsequence and
the sum on the right hand side lands in a constant multiple ofKfor the same reason as before,
usingq ‚Ä≤-convexity ofK.‚ñ°
24 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
3. Lecture III: Liquid vector spaces, redux
In today‚Äôs lecture, we spent some more time discussing condensed sets, condensed abelian
groups, and discussed the main theorem on liquid vector spaces.
Recall from the last lecture that condensed sets are sheaves on the category Prof of profinite
sets. (Up to set-theoretic issues, which we will from now on ignore ‚Äî they are resolved as in the
last lecture.) In other words, those are functors
X: Prof op ‚ÜíSet :S7‚ÜíX(S)
satisfying some simple conditions. Actually, these conditions simplify even further if one passes to
the generating subcategory Extr = qcProj‚äÇProf of extremally disconnected profinite sets. Then
a condensed set is equivalently given by a functor
X: Extr op ‚ÜíSet
that preserves finite products. Equivalently,X(‚àÖ) =‚àó, andX(S 1 ‚äîS2)‚ÜíX(S 1)√óX(S 2) is bijective
for allS 1, S2 ‚ààExtr. In particular, the category of condensed sets is almost given by a functor
category. This is what gives the theory of condensed sets an extremely algebraic nature. We note
that for anyS‚ààExtr, the functor
CondSet‚ÜíSet :X7‚ÜíX(S)
commutes with all limits, all filtered colimits, and preserves surjections. (In fact, it commutes
with all so-called sifted colimits.) It does not, however, in general commute with finite coproducts,
except in the trivial caseS=‚àó. The functor
CondSet‚ÜíSet :X7‚ÜíX(‚àó)
should be thought of as the ‚Äúunderlying set‚Äù functor, but it is not conservative (as shown by the
example ofR/R Œ¥).
Remark3.1.Both Prof and Extr (or rather the opposite categories) admit simple algebraic
descriptions. Namely,S7‚ÜíC(S,F 2) induces an equivalence between Prof op and the category of
Boolean algebras (i.e. those rings where all elements satisfyx 2 =x); while Extr‚äÇProf corresponds
to the category of complete Boolean algebras. (Here, a Boolean algebra is complete if any (possibly
infinite) set of elements has a supremum, where a Boolean algebra is partially ordered byx‚â§y
ifxy=x. Equivalently, a Boolean algebra is complete if and only if it is a retract of a Boolean
algebra of the form Q
I F2 for some setI.) Thus, condensed sets are the same thing as finite-
product-preserving functors from complete Boolean algebras to sets. (It is even enough to consider
the subcategory of Boolean algebras of the form Q
I F2.)
However, going down this route one tends to lose track of the topological intuition, and we will
not use the perspective of Boolean algebras.
Next, we discussed condensed abelian groups CondAb. These can be equivalently thought of as
abelian group objects in CondSet, or as sheaves of abelian groups on Prof. We note that as finite
coproducts agree with finite products, it is now the case that forS‚ààExtr, the functor
CondAb‚ÜíAb :X7‚ÜíX(S)
commutes with all limits and all colimits. This implies that CondAb has excellent categorical
properties: Like sheaves of abelian groups on any topos, it has all limits and all colimits, and
filtered colimits are exact, but in this case it is also true that arbitrary products are exact. In fact,
3. LECTURE III: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES, REDUX 25
it admits a class of compact projective generators, namely the free condensed abelian groupsZ[S]
forS‚ààExtr. We recall here that the forgetful functor
CondAb‚ÜíCondSet
admits a left adjoint, the ‚Äúfree condensed abelian group‚Äù functor
CondSet‚ÜíCondAb :X7‚ÜíZ[X].
Concretely, this is given by the sheafification ofS7‚ÜíZ[X(S)] (and the sheafification is important
here, even forS‚ààExtr).
Remark3.2.The constructionZ[X] forXsay a CW complex is closely related to classical
constructions due to Dold‚ÄìThom. The underlying set ofZ[X] is given byZ[X(‚àó)], i.e. finite
collections of points ofXweighted with integers. The condensed structure is made so that if
two points collide, the corresponding integers add up. This can also be understood as the group
completion of the free abelian monoidN[X], which can be written as
N[X] =
G
n‚â•0
Symn(X)
where Symn(X) =X n/Œ£n is the condensed set of unorderedn-tuples of elements ofX.
IfX=S‚ààProf, one can describeZ[S] explicitly.
Proposition3.3 ([Sch20, Proposition 2.1]).LetS= lim ‚Üê ‚àíi Si be a profinite set, written as a
cofiltered limit of finite setsS i. The free condensed abelian groupZ[S]is quasiseparated, and can
explicitly be written as a countable union of profinite subsets, as follows:
Z[S] ‚àº=
[
n>0
lim‚Üê ‚àíi
Z[Si]l1‚â§n ‚äÇlim‚Üê ‚àíi
Z[Si].
HereZ[S i] is the finite free abelian group on the finite setS i, and the subsetl 1 ‚â§nis the part
ofl 1-norm at mostn; this produces a finite subset ofZ[S i], so lim‚Üê ‚àíi Z[Si]l1‚â§n is a profinite set. We
note that by the discreteness ofZ, the precise choice of norm is irrelevant here: any bound on the
l1-norm also gives a bound on thel p-norm for all 0< p <1.
We note that this description is remarkably close to the description of the space of signed Radon
measuresM 1(S) ‚Äì but overZ, this construction produces the uncompleted free objects.
Another important structure is the tensor product of condensed abelian groups. In fact, like
on any topos, condensed abelian groups have a symmetric monoidal tensor product, representing
bilinear maps. Concretely, forM, N‚ààCondAb, the tensor productM‚äóNis the sheafification
of the presheafS7‚ÜíM(S)‚äóN(S). In this case, one can in fact understand what happens under
sheafification. Namely, for anyS‚ààExtr,
(M‚äóN)(S) =M(S)‚äó Z(S) N(S)
whereZ(S) = Cont(S,Z) is the algebra of continuous integer-valued functions onS. (Indeed, this
functor will already send finite disjoint unions to finite products.)
There is also a partial right adjoint to tensor product, the internal Hom functor Hom (‚àí,‚àí), so
that
Hom(M,Hom (N, P)) ‚àº= Hom(M‚äóN, P).
26 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Moreover, all operations can be derived (using existence of projective resolutions), leading to derived
tensor products‚àí‚äó L‚àíand derived internal Hom RHom .
At this point, it may be helpful to say a few words about flat objects, and projective objects.
Generally, it turns out that flat objects are plentiful and well-behaved, but projective objects are
extremely scarce, and fragile.
Proposition3.4.A condensed abelian groupM‚ààCondAbis flat if and only if for allS‚àà
Extr, the valueM(S)is torsion-free (as an abelian group). In that case,M(S)is torsion-free for
allS‚ààProf.
Proof.In the forward direction, it is enough to look at tensor products ofMwith short exact
sequences of abstract abelian groups (where everything commutes with evaluation atS). In the
converse direction, ifM(S) is torsion-free for allS‚ààExtr, then tensoring is exact on the presheaf
level. But sheafification is also exact.
For the final sentence, note that ifS‚ààProf andT‚ààExtr is a cover ofS, thenM(S),‚ÜíM(T),
showing that torsion-freeness ofM(T) implies torsion-freeness ofM(S).‚ñ°
Concerning projective objects, we have the following basic characterization.
Proposition3.5.A condensed abelian groupM‚ààCondAbis compact projective if and only
if it is a retract ofZ[S]for someS‚ààExtr; equivalently, if it is a retract ofZ[Œ≤I]for some infinite
setI. In that case, there is an isomorphismM‚äïZ[Œ≤I] ‚àº= Z[Œ≤I].
Proof.We already know thatZ[S] is compact projective whenS‚ààExtr. In the other direc-
tion, any surjectionZ[Œ≤I]‚ÜíMmust split, showing thatMis a retract. For the final statement,
we only sketch the argument. Choose a bijectionI ‚àº= I√óNand regardZ[Œ≤(I√óN)] as a certain
completion of M
N
Z[Œ≤I],
whereZ[Œ≤I] ‚àº= M‚äïM ‚Ä≤, and then reorder
(M‚äïM ‚Ä≤)‚äï(M‚äïM ‚Ä≤)‚äï. . . ‚àº= M‚äï(M ‚Ä≤ ‚äïM)‚äï(M ‚Ä≤ ‚äïM)‚äï. . . ,
to find an isomorphism (after recompleting)
Z[Œ≤(I√óN)] ‚àº= M‚äïZ[Œ≤(I√óN)].‚ñ°
The following question is open, and closely related to an open question on injective Banach
spaces [ASC+16, Section 1.6.1].
Question3.6.Are all compact projective condensed abelian groups isomorphic toZ[S] for
someS‚ààExtr?
We note that one can find non-extremally disconnectedSsuch thatZ[S] is compact projective;
for example, ifSis obtained by identifying two points in the boundary ofŒ≤N, thenZ[S] ‚àº= Z[Œ≤N].
In any case, this indicates that there are extremely few compact projectives. They are also
destroyed by basic operations:
Proposition3.7.For any infinite setsIandJ, the tensor productZ[Œ≤I]‚äóZ[Œ≤J] =Z[Œ≤I√óŒ≤J]
is not projective.
3. LECTURE III: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES, REDUX 27
The proposition is not completely trivial. In the appendix to this lecture, we include a proof
of a strengthening, answering a question in [ASC +16, Section 6.4.1] in the negative.
This leads to the following important warning.
W arning3.8.ForS‚ààExtr and anyM‚ààCondAb, clearly the Ext-groups
Exti(Z[S], M) =H i(S, M) = 0
vanish fori >0. However, the internal Ext-groups
Exti(Z[S], M)‚ààCondAb
are nonzero in general. Indeed, forS ‚Ä≤ ‚ààExtr, one has
Exti(Z[S], M)(S ‚Ä≤) = Exti(Z[S‚Ä≤]‚äóZ[S], M) = Ext i(Z[S‚Ä≤ √óS], M),
which may be nonzero by the previous proposition.
While the problem mentioned in the warning has never really led to any problems in situations
of practical interest (see especially the appendix for some positive results), it is sometimes annoying
in the theory development.
One might hope in particular that the issue discussed in this warning might disappear ifMis
suitably ‚Äúcomplete‚Äù. The answer is yes and no:
(1) In nonarchimedean functional analysis, when working with ‚Äúsolid‚Äù modules (see [Sch19]),
the issue disappers. In that case,Z[S] ‚ñÝ is compact projective for allS‚ààProf, and hence
(as profinite sets are stable under products) tensor products of compact projectives are
still compact projective.
(2) In archimedean functional analysis, we deal with ‚Äúliquid‚Äù vector spaces, and in this case
it turns out that the warning stays as acute. (In fact, in the appendix, we will prove
Proposition 3.7 by proving that the issue persists even in the world of Banach spaces.)
With this, let us now turn back to liquidR-vector spaces. Recall that for any profinite set
S= lim‚Üê ‚àíi Si (with finite setsS i), we have the space of signed Radon measures
M1(S) = Hom(C(S,R),R)
=

Œº:{clopenU‚äÇS} ‚ÜíR| Œº(‚àÖ) = 0, Œº(U1 ‚äîU 2) =Œº(U 1) +Œº(U 2)
‚àÉc:‚àÄU 1, . . . , Un disjoint :P
j |Œº(Uj)| ‚â§c

=
[
c>0
lim‚Üê ‚àíi
R[Si]l1‚â§c.
Notice that this has the prototypical form of a quasiseparated condensed set, as a union of compact
Hausdorff subsets.
Remark3.9.Note that this definition of Radon measures on profinite sets is straightforward,
as one has to define the measure only on open and closed subsets. In contrast, for general compact
Hausdorff spacesX, the usual definition ofM(X) is rather complicated, involving Borel sets,
countable additivity, and inner/outer regularity. The perspective of condensed sets gives a different
approach. Namely, from the condensed perspective,Xis a quotient of a profinite setSby a
profinite equivalence relationR‚äÇS√ó X S. In that case, there is an exact sequence
M(R)‚Üí M(S)‚Üí M(X)‚Üí0
which can also be used to defineM(X) as the quotient ofM(S) byM(R).
28 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
It turned out that this choice of measures does not define an abelian category of ‚ÄúM1-complete‚Äù
R-vector spaces; in fact, it is necessary to include non-locally convex objects. This led us to consider,
for 0< p‚â§1, the variant
Mp(S) =

Œº:{clopenU‚äÇS} ‚ÜíR| Œº(‚àÖ) = 0, Œº(U1 ‚äîU 2) =Œº(U 1) +Œº(U 2)
‚àÉc:‚àÄU 1, . . . , Un disjoint :P
j |Œº(Uj)|p ‚â§c

=
[
c>0
lim‚Üê ‚àíi
R[Si]lp‚â§c.
Remark3.10.These spaces shrink aspgets smaller. One might even define a limiting case
forp= 0, defining
M0(S) =
[
c>0
lim‚Üê ‚àíi
R[Si]l0‚â§c
where the conditionl 0 ‚â§cmeans that at most‚åäc‚åãcoefficients are nonzero, and thel 1-norm is
at mostc. (Once one bounds the number of nonzero coefficients, the precise choice of norm does
not matter.) As an analogue of Proposition 3.3, it turns out that this is just the uncompleted free
condensedR-vector space onS
R[S] =M 0(S).
For a fixedp, the issue persists: There is a nonzero map
lp(N)‚Üíl 2(N)/lp(N) : (xn)n 7‚Üí(x n log|x n|)n
of condensedR-vector spaces, whose restriction to basis vectors is zero. However, its restriction to
lq(N) withq < pis zero. Thus, we consider the variant
M<p(S) =
[
q<p
Mq(S).
All these spaces of measures have the subsetS‚äÇ M q(S)‚äÇ M <p(S) of Dirac measures.
Now we can state the main theorem on liquid vector spaces. In this course, we will use this as
a black box; for the proof we refer to [Sch20, Lecture VI ‚Äì IX]. The theorem is quite a mouthful.
The essential content is that (R,M <p) (and (Z,M <p)) is an analytic ring in the sense of [Sch19];
most of this theorem is then a formal consequence of general properties of analytic rings.
Theorem3.11.LetVbe a condensed abelian group. The following are equivalent.
(1) For allS‚ààProf, allf:S‚ÜíV, and allq < p, there is a unique extension offto a map
efq :M q(S)‚ÜíV.
(2) For allS‚ààProfand allf:S‚ÜíV, there is a unique extension offto a map ef:
M<p(S)‚ÜíV.
(3) One can writeVas a cokernel of a map
M
j
M<p(Tj)‚Üí
M
i
M<p(Si).
The class of suchVis an abelian subcategoryLiquid p ofCondAbstable under all limits, all colimits,
all extensions, and all internal Hom‚Äôs (and internal Ext‚Äôs). In fact, on the level of derived categories,
the functor
D(Liquidp)‚ÜíD(CondAb)
3. LECTURE III: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES, REDUX 29
is fully faithful, and the essential image consists of all thoseC‚ààD(CondAb)for which all coho-
mologiesH i(C)lie inLiquid p. For allC‚ààD(Liquid p), allS‚ààProf, and allq < p, the maps
RHom(M<p(S), C)‚ÜíRHom (Mq(S), C)‚ÜíRHom (Z[S], C)
are isomorphisms (giving a derived and internal version of conditions (1) and (2)).
The embeddingLiquid p ‚äÇCondAbadmits a left adjointM7‚ÜíM liq, called (p-)liquidification,
whose left derived functor defines a left adjoint to the inclusion
D(Liquidp)‚ÜíD(CondAb).
Liquidification commutes with all colimits and sendsZ[S]toM <p(S). In particular, forS=‚àó, it
sendsZtoR.
There is a unique symmetric monoidal tensor product‚àí ‚äó R<p ‚àíonLiquid p makingM7‚ÜíM liq
symmetric monoidal, i.e. such that
M liq ‚äóR<p N liq ‚àº= (M‚äóN) liq.
Concretely,‚àí ‚äó R<p ‚àírepresents bilinear maps inLiquid p. Its left derived functor defines a sym-
metric monoidal tensor product onD(Liquid p)making the left adjointD(CondAb)‚ÜíD(Liquid p)
symmetric monoidal.
All functors just mentioned (liquidification, forgetful functors, and tensor products) commute
with all colimits (resp. all direct sums on the level of derived categories).
As the liquidification ofZisR, it follows that the tensor unit ofLiquid p isR, and thus all objects
ofLiquid p have unique and functorialR-module structures. All the above results on the relation
betweenLiquid p andCondAbare also true about the relation betweenLiquid p andCond(R).
Remark3.12.AsZ liq =R liq =R, it follows that (R/Z) liq = 0. In fact, more generally, for any
compact abelian groupA, one hasA liq = 0. Thus, for example,Z liq
2 = 0.
The following remark may be safely ignored (and reading it may actually lead to confusion, as
it generalizes the concept of liquidity in a way not captured by the above discussion, but also not
relevant for this course).
Remark3.13.When we tried to find an analytic ring structure onR(and eventually found
thep-liquid analytic ring structure), we also wondered whether this analytic ring structure onR
might admit non-archimedean analogues, say overQ 2 (or any prime in place 2, but the lettersp,q
andlare already taken...). And indeed, it does! More precisely, for any 0‚â§p‚â§ ‚àû, we can define
Mp(S,Q 2) =
[
c>0
lim‚Üê ‚àíi
Q2[Si]lp‚â§c
where for 0< p <‚àû, thel p-norm is defined as usual by P
s‚ààSi |xs|p (which is now subadditive,
as|x+y| p ‚â§max(|x| p,|y| p)‚â§ |x| p +|y| p in the nonarchimedean case), thel 0-norm is defined
as in Remark 3.10, and thel ‚àû-norm is the supremum norm. ThenM 0(S,Q 2) =Q 2[S], while
M‚àû(S,Q 2) is the dual ofC(S,Q 2). It turns out that all pairs
(Q2,M 0),(Q 2,M <p)0<p‚â§‚àû,(Q 2,M ‚àû)
define (pairwise distinct) analytic rings. For the first, all condensedQ 2-vector spaces are complete.
In the middle, we have various classes ofp-liquidQ 2-vector spaces for varyingp. Finally,M ‚àû-
completeQ 2-vector spaces are exactly the solidQ2-vector spaces. Thus, over nonarchimedean fields,
30 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
there is a whole line 0‚â§p‚â§ ‚àûof possible ‚Äúcompleteness‚Äù conditions, interpolating from arbitrary
to ‚Äúliquid‚Äù to ‚Äúsolid‚Äù.
OverR, one has to stop atp= 1, because of the triangle inequality. This picture is extremely
reminiscent of the Berkovich space ofZ, which includes a full (0,‚àû) at each nonarchimedean place,
but only a half-open interval (0,1] at the archimedean place.
All these various notions of liquidity overRand the various nonarchimedean local fields like
Q2 can be understood as specializations of a notion of liquid module over a ring of overconvergent
arithmetic Laurent seriesZ((T)) >r, constructed in [Sch20, Lecture VI ‚Äì IX]. In the current lectures,
we will only consider the case overR, and so as in the theorem, ‚Äúliquid‚Äù will implyR-vector space
for us, discarding these analogues of liquid vector spaces over nonarchimedean fields.
Coming back to the discussion of flat and projective objects, we discuss flat objects in the
following proposition (and projective objects in the appendix).
Theorem3.14.For anyS‚ààProf, the objectM <p(S)‚ààLiquid p is flat. Moreover, for any
quasiseparatedp-liquidR-vector spaceV, there is a natural isomorphism
M<p(S)‚äó R<p V ‚àº=
[
q<p
[
K‚äÇV
q-convex
Mq(S, K).
Here, for finiteS, we define
Mq(S, K)‚äÇR[S]‚äó R V
as theq-convex hull of the|S|closed subsetsK ‚àº= [s]‚äóK‚äÇR[S]‚äó R V,s‚ààS, and in general
Mq(S, K) = lim‚Üê ‚àíi
Mq(Si, K)
forS= lim‚Üê ‚àíi Si profinite.
Proof.Consider the functor
V7‚Üí M <p(S;V) =
[
q<p
[
K‚äÇV
q-convex
Mq(S, K),
which is an endofunctor on quasiseparatedp-liquidR-vector spaces. (Indeed, eachM q(S, K) is a
compactq-convex subset, and all transition maps are injective.) This is an exact functor: If
0‚ÜíV‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0
is an exact sequence of quasiseparatedp-liquidR-vector spaces, then
(1) the mapM <p(S;V)‚Üí M <p(S;V ‚Ä≤) is injective, directly from the definition. In fact, this
holds for any injectionV ,‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤, not necessarily with quasiseparated quotient.
(2) the image ofM <p(S;V)‚Üí M <p(S;V ‚Ä≤) is the kernel ofM <p(S;V ‚Ä≤)‚Üí M <p(S;V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤), as
for any compactq-convexK ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤ with imageK ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤, any element in the kernel of
Mq(S;K ‚Ä≤)‚Üí M q(S;K ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤) actually defines an element ofM q(S;K), whereK=V‚à©K ‚Ä≤.
(3) the mapM <p(S;V ‚Ä≤)‚Üí M <p(S;V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤) is surjective, as any compactq-convexK ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ is
the image of some compactq-convexK ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤, in which caseM q(S;K ‚Ä≤)‚Üí M q(S;K ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤) is
surjective (by Tychonoff). Indeed, asV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ is surjective, there is some compact subset
K0 ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤ with imageK ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤, and this is contained in a compactq-convex subsetK 1 ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤.
Then the intersection ofK 1 with the preimage ofK ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ is a compactq-convex subsetK ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇV ‚Ä≤
with imageK ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤.
3. LECTURE III: LIQUID VECTOR SPACES, REDUX 31
In particular, the functor commutes with finite direct sums. In fact, it commutes with infinite
direct sums (as any compactK‚äÇ L
i Vi is already contained in some finite direct sum). Moreover,
forV=M <p(S‚Ä≤), there is a natural isomorphism
M<p(S;M <p(S‚Ä≤)) ‚àº= M<p(S√óS ‚Ä≤),
by writing out the definitions.
Now anyp-liquid condensedR-vector spaceVadmits a resolution
. . .‚Üí
M
i1
M<p(Si1)‚Üí
M
i0
M<p(Si0)‚ÜíV‚Üí0
where allS i0,S i1 etc. are extremally disconnected profinite sets. IfVis quasiseparated, then
applyingM <p(S;‚àí) to this sequence gives a long exact sequence
. . .‚Üí
M
i1
M<p(S√óS i1)‚Üí
M
i0
M<p(S√óS i0)‚Üí M <p(S;V)‚Üí0.
But the complex
. . .‚Üí
M
i1
M<p(S√óS i1)‚Üí
M
i0
M<p(S√óS i0)
computesM <p(S)‚äóLR<pV. This discussion implies thatM <p(S)‚äóLR<pVis concentrated in degree
0, and given byM <p(S;V), as desired.
Finally, for anyp-liquid condensedR-vector spaceV, we can find a surjectionV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíVwith
V ‚Ä≤ quasiseparated, in which case alsoV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ = ker(V ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV)‚äÇV ‚Ä≤ is quasiseparated. Taking derived
tensor products of
0‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV‚Üí0
withM <p(S), we see thatM <p(S)‚äóLR<pVis concentrated in degree 0 if and only ifM <p(S;V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤)‚Üí
M<p(S;V ‚Ä≤) is injective. But this is item (1) above.‚ñ°
32 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Appendix to Lecture III: Remarks on projective objects
The goal of this appendix is to discuss some positive and some negative results on projective
objects. The results of this appendix are not used in this course, and we mostly include them here
to record them.
The starting point is the following positive result. Here,œâ 1 is the first uncountable ordinal, and
hence Prof œâ1 is the category of profinite sets that are countable limits of finite sets; equivalently,
this is the category of metrizable profinite sets. The pullback functor CondSet œâ1 ‚ÜíCondSet is
fully faithful; objects in the image are calledœâ 1-condensed. Equivalently, a condensed setXis
œâ1-condensed if the functor
Profop ‚ÜíSet
commutes withœâ 1-filtered colimits, i.e.
X(lim‚Üê ‚àíi
Si) = lim‚àí ‚Üíi
X(S i)
wheneverS i ‚ààProf, and the index category isœâ 1-filtered (i.e. any countable subdiagram can be
extended with a cone point).
Proposition3.15.LetMbe aœâ 1-condensed abelian group. Then for alli >0,
Exti(Z[N‚à™ {‚àû}], M) = 0.
In other words, withinœâ 1-condensed abelian group,Z[N‚à™ {‚àû}] is internally projective. (While
within all condensed abelian groups, it is not even projective! And within all condensed abelian
groups, Proposition 3.7 shows that there are essentially no internally projective objects.)
Proof.LetS‚ààExtr. We have to see that
H i(S√ó(N‚à™ {‚àû}), M) = 0
fori >0. Consider the pushout diagram
‚àÇŒ≤(S√óN) //

Œ≤(S√óN)

S√ó {‚àû} // S√ó(N‚à™ {‚àû}).
This induces a Mayer‚ÄìVietoris type sequence
. . .‚ÜíH i(S√ó(N‚à™ {‚àû}), M)‚ÜíH i(S√ó {‚àû}, M)‚äïH i(Œ≤(S√óN), M)‚ÜíH i(‚àÇŒ≤(S√óN), M)‚Üí. . . .
Here,S=S√ó {‚àû}andŒ≤(S√óN) are extremally disconnected profinite sets, so theirH i(‚àí, M)
vanishes fori >0. Thus, it suffices to show that the restriction maps
H i(Œ≤(S√óN), M)‚ÜíH i(‚àÇŒ≤(S√óN), M)
are surjective for alli‚â•0. This is a special case of the next lemma.‚ñ°
Lemma3.16.LetMbe anœâ 1-condensed abelian group and letS‚äÇTbe an injection of profinite
sets. Then for alli‚â•0the mapH i(T, M)‚ÜíH i(S, M)is surjective.
APPENDIX TO LECTURE III: REMARKS ON PROJECTIVE OBJECTS 33
Proof.AsMisœâ 1-condensed, the functorS7‚ÜíH i(S, M) takesœâ 1-cofiltered limits to filtered
colimits. WritingTas anœâ 1-cofiltered limit of its metrizable quotients (andSas the corresponding
limit of its images), we can thus assume thatTandSare metrizable. In that case,Sis injective in
the category of profinite sets (by writing it as a sequential limit of finite sets along surjective maps,
and noting that injections of profinite sets admit the left lifting property against surjective maps
of finite sets). Thus,S ,‚ÜíTsplits, and consequentlyH i(T, M)‚ÜíH i(S, M) is surjective.‚ñ°
One might wonder whether further profinite setsShave the property thatH i(S, M) = 0 for
allM‚ààCondAb œâ1 andi >0. Regarding this property, we have the following proposition.
Proposition3.17.LetS‚ààProf. Consider the following conditions.
(1) For allM‚ààCondAb œâ1 and alli >0, one hasH i(S, M) = 0.
(2) For allM‚ààLiquid p ‚à©CondAb œâ1 and alli >0, one hasH i(S, M) = 0.
(3) For all Smith spacesWwhose unit ball is metrizable, one hasH 1(S, W) = 0.
(4) The real Banach spaceC(S)is separably injective in the sense of[ASC +16, Definition
2.1].
Then (1)‚áí(2)‚áí(3)‚áí(4).
In the proof, we use the yoga of Banach and Smith spaces, for which we refer to [Sch20, Lecture
IV].
Proof.It is clear that (1)‚áí(2)‚áí(3). To show that this implies (4), letV‚äÇV ‚Ä≤ be a closed
immersion of separable Banach spaces andV‚ÜíC(S) a map of Banach spaces. We wish to show
that it extends to a mapV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíC(S). We note that the exact sequence 0‚ÜíV‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0 of
Banach spaces dualizes to an exact sequence 0‚ÜíW ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíW ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíW‚Üí0 of Smith spaces, and the
mapV‚ÜíC(S) dualizes to a mapM 1(S)‚ÜíWof Smith spaces, which is in fact determined by
the mapS‚ÜíW. The condition that theV‚Äôs are separable is equivalent to the condition that the
W‚Äôs have metrizable unit balls. By (3), one hasH 1(S, W ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤) = 0, and hence the mapS‚ÜíWlifts to
a mapS‚ÜíW ‚Ä≤, which then extends uniquely to a mapM 1(S)‚ÜíW ‚Ä≤ of Smith spaces, necessarily
liftingM 1(S)‚ÜíW. Dualizing again, we arrive at the desired extensionV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíC(S).‚ñ°
One negative result is a theorem of Amir:
Theorem3.18 ([Ami64, Theorem 3]).For a metrizable profinite setS, the Banach spaceC(S)
is separably injective if and only ifC(S) ‚àº= c0(N). In particular,C(S)is not separably injective for
the Cantor setS.
The book [ASC+16] raises the question whether the non-metrizable profinite setS=Œ≤N√óŒ≤N
has the property thatC(S) is separably injective, see [ASC +16, Section 6.4.1]. We answer this in
the negative:
Theorem3.19.The Banach spaceC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N)is not separably injective.
In particular, by Proposition 3.17, this implies that not allH i(S, M) vanish fori >0 and
M‚ààCondAb œâ1, which in particular gives Proposition 3.7. (In fact, if one only wishes to show
Proposition 3.7, it suffices to show thatC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N) is not an injective Banach space. This follows
from it admittingc 0(N) as a direct summand by [Cem84], andc0(N) not being injective, [ASC+16,
Theorem 1.25].)
34 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Remark3.20.The proof below can also be read line-by-line with all Banach spacesC(S)
replaced by free condensed abelian groupsZ[S], leading to a proof thatZ[Œ≤N√óŒ≤N] has nontrivial
Ext1-groups againstœâ 1-condensed abelian groups, without unnecessarily involving Banach spaces.
We formulate the proof in terms of Banach spaces in order to cover the question asked in [ASC+16].
Given a profinite setS, one can naturally endow the set of all closed subsets ofSwith the
structure of a profinite set Sub(S). One way to do this is to observe that for finite setsS, Sub(S)
is itself a finite set, and the associationS7‚ÜíSub(S) admits a covariant functoriality (by taking
images of subsets). For general profiniteS= lim‚Üê ‚àíi Si, one can then define Sub(S) = lim‚Üê ‚àíi Sub(Si) as
a profinite set. Note that indeed the underlying set of Sub(S) is given by the set of closed subsets of
S: Any closed subsetZ‚äÇSis itself the limit of its imagesZ i ‚äÇS i (and conversely any compatible
collection of subsetsZ i ‚äÇS i defines a closed subsetZ‚äÇSin the inverse limit). Also note that if
Sis metrizable, then so is Sub(S). One can give a ‚Äúmoduli description‚Äù of Sub(S): For any other
profinite setT, maps fromTto Sub(S) are in bijection with those closed subsetsZ‚äÇS√óTsuch
that for all finite quotientsS‚ÜíS i, the imageZ i ‚äÇS i √óT(ofZ‚äÇS√óT) is locally onTconstant.
We note that the subset Sub oc(S)‚äÇSub(S) of open and closed subsets defines a dense subset,
which is also countable in caseSis metrizable.
IfSis metrizable, one can find a ‚Äúuniversal‚Äù family of metrizable covers ofS. Indeed, any
suchTadmits a closed immersionT ,‚Üí {0,1} N √óS. LetT n ‚äÇ {0,1} n √óSbe the image of
T. ThenT n = F
Œ±n‚àà{0,1}n Tn,Œ±n, where eachT n,Œ±n ‚äÇSis a closed subset. SuchT n‚Äôs are then
parametrized by Sub(S) {0,1}n
, and the condition thatT n ‚ÜíSis a cover defines a closed subset
Sub(S){0,1}n
cov ‚äÇSub(S) {0,1}n
. Varyingn, there are transition maps
Sub(S){0,1}n+1
cov ‚ÜíSub(S) {0,1}n
cov
taking a collection
(TŒ±n+1)Œ±n+1‚àà{0,1}n+1
of closed subsets ofSto the collection (T n,Œ±n)Œ±n given byT Œ±n =T (Œ±n,0) ‚à™T (Œ±n,1). Let
Cov(S) = lim‚Üê ‚àín
Sub(S){0,1}n
cov ;
this is a metrizable profinite set whose points parametrize metrizable coversT‚ÜíSwith a fixed
embeddingT ,‚Üí {0,1} N √óS.
There is a countable dense subset Cov oc(S) of Cov(S) consisting of thoseTsuch that allT n,Œ±n
are open and closed subsets ofS, and for largenall inclusionsT n+1,Œ±n+1 ‚äÇT n,Œ±n are equalities.
Now we can give a reformulation of the separable injectivity ofC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N).
Proposition3.21.The Banach spaceC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N)is separably injective if and only if for all
metrizable profinite setsS 1 andS 2 with a metrizable coverT‚ÜíS 1 √óS 2, there are metrizable covers
S‚Ä≤
1 ‚ÜíS 1 andS ‚Ä≤
2 ‚ÜíS 2 and a commutative diagram
C(S1 √óS 2) //
''
C(T)

C(S ‚Ä≤
1 √óS ‚Ä≤
2).
APPENDIX TO LECTURE III: REMARKS ON PROJECTIVE OBJECTS 35
Proof.We prove only the direction of relevance to us, namely that the separable injectivity
ofC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N) implies this statement. AsT‚ÜíS 1 √óS 2 is a cover, the mapC(S 1 √óS 2)‚ÜíC(T) is
a closed immersion of separable Banach spaces. Choose surjectionsŒ≤N‚ÜíS 1,Œ≤N‚ÜíS 2. Then the
mapC(S 1 √óS 2)‚ÜíC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N) extends toC(T) by separable injectivity ofC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N). But
C(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N) = lim ‚àí ‚Üí
Œ≤N‚ÜíS ‚Ä≤
1,Œ≤N‚ÜíS ‚Ä≤
2
C(S ‚Ä≤
1 √óS ‚Ä≤
2)
is theœâ 1-filtered colimit of Banach spaces, where the index category is over all metrizable quotients
S‚Ä≤
1,S ‚Ä≤
2 ofŒ≤N; we may assume that these quotients map toS 1 andS 2. Thus, any mapC(T)‚Üí
C(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N) from the separable Banach spaceC(T) factors over someC(S ‚Ä≤
1 √óS ‚Ä≤
2), giving the desired
result. ‚ñ°
We will show that if this property holds true, then in a certain ‚Äúuniversal‚Äù case it cannot be
necessary to include the cover ofS 1. Intuitively, the point is that givenS 1, there is a universal case
forS 2 (given by Cov(S 1)) and in this universal case, any one metrizable coverS ‚Ä≤
1 ‚ÜíS 1 does not
really simplify the situation.
As preparation, we recall the following.
Proposition3.22.LetSbe the Cantor set, and letf:T‚ÜíSbe a metrizable cover. Then
there is a closed subsetZ‚äÇShomeomorphic to the Cantor set on whichfsplits.
Proof.This is well-known; one can for example writeT= lim ‚Üê ‚àín Tn as above, and inductively
for eachnchoose 2 n pairwise disjoint open and closed subsetsS Œ±n with splittingsS Œ±n ‚ÜíT n; then
lim‚Üê ‚àín
F
Œ±n SŒ±n is a closed subset ofSon whichfsplits, and which contains a Cantor set (as it
surjects onto the Cantor set, and this surjection admits a splitting as all metrizable profinite sets
are injective in the category of profinite sets).‚ñ°
Now letSbe the Cantor set and letJ= Cov oc(S). We get a surjective mapŒ≤J‚ÜíCov(S).
Proposition3.23.Assume thatC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N)is separably injective. Then there is a commutative
diagram
C(S√óCov(S)) //
((
C(T)

C(S√óŒ≤J)
whereT‚ÜíS√óCov(S)is the universal cover.
Proof.Using Proposition 3.21, we see that there is some coverf:S ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíSand a commutative
diagram
C(S√óCov(S)) //
((
C(T)

C(S ‚Ä≤ √óŒ≤J).
We need to get rid of the coverf:S ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíS. For this, we pick a copy of the Cantor setZ‚äÇSon
whichfsplits.
36 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Fix a retractionr:S‚ÜíZ. This induces a map Cov(S)‚ÜíCov(Z) (as for any surjective map
of metrizable profinite sets), and lettingT Z ‚ÜíZ√óCov(Z) be the universal family, there is a map
T‚ÜíT Z overS√óCov(S)‚ÜíZ√óCov(Z). In particular, we get a commutative diagram
C(Z√óCov(Z)) //

C(T Z)

C(S√óCov(S)) // C(T).
By assumption, we get a further mapC(T)‚ÜíC(S ‚Ä≤ √óŒ≤J).
LetJ Z = Covoc(Z). Using the retractionr:S‚ÜíZ, one can use contravariant functoriality of
Covoc(‚àí) to get a mapJ Z ‚ÜíJ= Cov oc(S), inducing a mapŒ≤J Z ‚ÜíŒ≤J‚ÜíCov(S). The composite
Œ≤JZ ‚ÜíCov(S)‚ÜíCov(Z) is given by the unique extension of the mapJ Z ‚ÜíCov oc(Z)‚äÇCov(Z).
In particular, we get the mapC(T)‚ÜíC(S ‚Ä≤√óŒ≤J)‚ÜíC(Z√óŒ≤J Z) by restriction alongZ√óŒ≤J Z ‚Üí
S‚Ä≤ √óŒ≤J. We claim that the composite
C(Z√óCov(Z))‚ÜíC(T Z)‚ÜíC(T)‚ÜíC(S ‚Ä≤ √óŒ≤J)‚ÜíC(Z√óŒ≤J Z)
is pullback along the mapZ√óŒ≤J Z ‚ÜíZ√óCov(Z). But the first three maps compose to pullback
along the mapS ‚Ä≤ √óŒ≤J‚ÜíZ√óCov(Z) that is given byS ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíS r‚àí ‚ÜíZin the first factor and by
Œ≤J‚ÜíCov(S)‚ÜíCov(Z) in the second factor. Restricting toZ√óŒ≤J Z, the claim follows.
Thus, we get the desired splitting (for the Cantor setZin place ofS, but they are isomorphic).
‚ñ°
Back to our Cantor setS, choose a metrizable coverS ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíSsuch thatC(S)‚ÜíC(S ‚Ä≤) does not
split. In fact, let us choose one such cover such that even the mapC(U)‚äÇC(S)‚ÜíC(S ‚Ä≤) does not
split for any open and closed subsetU‚äÇS, for example by choosing one such cover for each open
and closed subset ofSand then taking the product of all such covers (noting that there are only
countably many open and closed subsets ofS). We can find a pointx‚ààCov(S) giving rise to this
coverS ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíS. Picking a point ofŒ≤Jmapping tox, Proposition 3.23 implies that ifC(Œ≤N√óŒ≤N) is
separably injective, then there is a commutative diagram
C(S√óCov(S)) //
''
C(T)

C(S)
where the diagonal arrow is evaluation atx‚ààCov(S). Now take the infimumC, over all possible
open and closed subsetsU‚äÇSand all mapsf:C(T)‚ÜíC(U) making the diagram
C(S√óCov(S)) //

C(T)

C(S) // C(U)
commute, of the norm off. (Clearly,C‚â•1.) Choose some suchUandffor which||f||< C+ 1
2.
Note that we may always replacefbyfprecomposed with the projection to the preimage of
an open and closed subset of Cov(S) containingx. Choosing a retractionr:T‚ÜíS ‚Ä≤ ofTto
S‚Ä≤ =T√ó Cov(S) {x}, we find that||f‚àíf‚ó¶r||<1 (otherwise we could make||f||smaller at
APPENDIX TO LECTURE III: REMARKS ON PROJECTIVE OBJECTS 37
least on an open and closed subset ofUby precomposing with such a projection to an open and
closed subset of Cov(S)). But thenf‚ó¶r:C(S ‚Ä≤)‚ÜíC(U) is almost an inverse to the pullback
g:C(U)‚äÇC(S)‚ÜíC(S ‚Ä≤), more precisely||1‚àíg‚ó¶f‚ó¶r||<1, but then a geometric series produces
an actual inverse tog.
38 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
4. Lecture IV: Liquid tensor product calculations
Let us recap. For every 0< p‚â§1, we have an abelian full subcategory Liquid p of CondAb (or
of condensedR-modules), closed under limits and colimits, generated by the compact projective
objects
M<p(S),
the spaces of< p-summable measures onS‚ààProf. There is also a tensor product‚àí ‚äó R<p ‚àíon
Liquidp, theliquid tensor product, which:
(1) commutes with colimits in each variable;
(2) satisfiesM <p(S)‚äó R<p M<p(T) =M <p(S√óT) forS, T‚ààProf.
Moreover, forV, W‚ààLiquid p, thep-liquid vector spaceV‚äó R<p Wcorepresents the functor of
bilinear maps of condensed abelian groups (or condensedR-modules) out ofV√óWwithp-liquid
target.
We also saw that the basic objects,M <p(S) forS‚ààProf, are flat. In this lecture, we want
to carry this further and demonstrate a non-trivial calculation of the liquid tensor product, in the
context of spaces of holomorphic functions on disks in the complex plane. We will also illustrate,
in this case, some important principles which we‚Äôll revisit from a more thorough perspective when
we discussnuclear modules.
All these spaces of holomorphic functions for varying disks are isomorphic by translation and
scaling, so we may as well just consider the unit diskD, with
O(D) ={
X
n‚â•0
cnT n |c nrn ‚Üí0‚àÄr <1} ‚äÇC[[T]].
We will explain the structure of condensedC-module onO(D) and prove the following.
Theorem4.1.For each0< p‚â§1, the spaceO(D)isp-liquid, and is flat with respect to the
p-liquid tensor product. Moreover, fork‚â•0, thek-foldp-liquid tensor product
O(D)‚äóC<p k
identifies with the space of holomorphic functions on the unit polydiskD k ‚äÇC k,
O(Dk) ={
X
n1,...,nk‚â•0
cn1,...,nk T n1
1 . . . Tnk
k |c n1,...,nk rn1
1 . . . rnk
k ‚Üí0‚àÄr 1, . . . , rk <1} ‚äÇC[[T 1, . . . , Tn]].
Remark4.2.Although this theorem looks very relevant to our purposes, it turns out that we
(probably) won‚Äôt actually use it in the remainder of the course! We‚Äôre including it here because
another purpose of this class is to present some basic information about the liquid category and
how to work in it.
Note that, because of the‚àÄr <1 in the definition,O(D) is an intersection, or inverse limit, of
more basic spaces of sequences with some given convergence criterion. (We will be more explicit
about this later.) The essential content of the above theorem is that we can commute these inverse
limits past the liquid tensor product. This illustrates that thep-liquid tensor product is ‚Äúcomplete
enough‚Äù: even though it‚Äôs only designed to commute with colimits in each variable, it actually also
commutes with many inverse limits arising in practice, though for highly non-formal reasons.
Another notable aspect of this theorem is that thep-liquid tensor product is, in this example,
independent ofp, and simply gives the natural multi-variable analog of the given space of functions.
4. LECTURE IV: LIQUID TENSOR PRODUCT CALCULATIONS 39
This is also far from formal, and in fact it fails for spaces of continuous functions. Indeed, ifSand
Tare infinite profinite sets, then
C(S;R)‚äó R<p C(T;R)Ã∏=C(S√óT;R),
for allp, and the left-hand side depends onp. The problem is that the topology on spaces of
continuous functions comes from the sup norm, which morally corresponds to takingp=‚àû, so to
have the desired K Ãà unneth result we would need to take a tensor product over ‚ÄúR‚àû‚Äù. As discussed
in the previous lecture, this doesn‚Äôt exist as an analytic ring. However, replacingRbyQ 2 for an
arbitrary prime 2, such a theory withp=‚àûdoes exist: the solid theory. And for the solid tensor
product, the K Ãà unneth formula for continuous functions on profinite sets does hold.
In principle, to perform the tensor product calculation in the theorem, we should resolveO(D)
by the basic liquid spacesM <p(S) and then use the calculational properties (1),(2) of the liquid
tensor product to compute. But in practice, it‚Äôs much easier to follow a more indirect route. In
fact, we will start with something which looks completely unrelated: spaces of measures onlocally
profinitetopological spaces.
Before we explain what we mean by this, let‚Äôs explain what we don‚Äôt mean. For a profinite
setS, the space of measuresM <p(S) can alternatively be described as thep-liquidification ofZ[S]
since, by definition,M <p(S) is the freep-liquid space onS. But now for any condensed setX, we
can also take thep-liquidification ofZ[X] and consider this as a kind of space of measures onX.
But these aren‚Äôt the kind of measures we‚Äôll want. For example, ifXis the filtered union of its
profinite subsets, then
Z[X]liqp =
[
S‚äÇX,S‚ààProf
M<p(S),
and this corresponds to not arbitrary< p-summable measures onX(whatever that means), but
tocompactly supported< p-summable measures onX.
However, ifXislocally profinite‚Äî equivalently,Xis Hausdorff and the compact open subsets of
Xform a basis for the topology ‚Äî then we can directly define a space of (non-compactly supported)
measures onXby a simple generalization of the case of profiniteX. Namely, a measure onXis a
function
Œº:{U‚äÇX|Ucompact open} ‚ÜíR
such thatŒº(‚àÖ) = 0 andŒº(U‚äîV) =Œº(U) +Œº(V) for disjointUandV. For 0< p‚â§1, such aŒº
is called ap-measure, or a measure of boundedp-variation, or ap-summable measure, if there is a
C >0 such that
X
i‚ààI
|Œº(Ui)|p ‚â§C
whenever (Ui)i‚ààI is a finite set of disjoint compact open subsets ofX.
The set ofp-measures is denotedM p(X), and we give it the structure of a condensed set (and
in fact, condensedR-module) by
Mp(X) =
[
C>0
M(X) lp‚â§C,
40 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
whereM(X) lp‚â§C is the closed (hence compact Hausdorff) subset of Q
Ucompact open [‚àíC1/p, C1/p]
specified by the above conditions of finite additivity and havingp-variation‚â§C. Finally, we set
M<p(X) =
[
q<p
Mq(X).
W arning4.3.These spaces of measuresM <p(X) are not covariantly functorial for arbitrary
continuous mapsX‚ÜíY, but only forpropermaps.
Generalizing our discussion for profiniteX, we have the following.
Proposition4.4.LetXbe a locally profinite space and0< p‚â§1. Then:
(1)M <p(X)isp-liquid;
(2)M <p(X)is flat with respect to thep-liquid tensor product;
(3) IfX, Yare both locally profinite, then there is a natural identificationM <p(X)‚äó R<p
M<p(Y) =M <p(X√óY).
The proof will use the following two lemmas. The first lemma says that we can express these
measures on locally profinite sets simply in terms of measures on profinite sets, by means of the
one-point compactification.
Lemma4.5.LetXbe locally profinite, and letX‚à™ ‚àû ‚ààProfbe the one-point compactification
ofX. Then there are natural identifications
M<p(X) =M <p(X‚à™ ‚àû)/M <p(‚àû) = ker (M<p(X‚à™ ‚àû)‚Üí M <p(‚àó)).
Proof.First note that by functoriality, the composition
R=M <p(‚àû)‚Üí M <p(X‚à™ ‚àû)‚Üí M <p(‚àó) =R
is the identity, so we get a direct summand decomposition ofM <p(X‚à™ ‚àû), and in particular the
last two expressions in the statement of the lemma are equal. Now we will identify the two outer
expressions.
The clopen subsets ofX‚à™ ‚àûcan be categorized into two types:
(1) those which lie inX: these correspond bijectively to compact open subsets ofX;
(2) those which contain‚àû: these correspond (by intersecting withX) bijectively to thecom-
plementsof compact open subsets ofX.
Thus, to promote a measure onXto a measure onX‚à™ ‚àûamounts to additionally specifying
valuesŒº(V) for subsetsV‚äÇXwhich are complements of compact opens, such that additivity and
boundedp-variation hold.
However, if the measure is to lie in ker (M <p(X‚à™ ‚àû)‚Üí M <p(‚àó)), then the total measure has
to be 0, which means that the value on the complement of a compact openUmust be equal to
‚àíŒº(U). This sets up a bijection between finitely additive measures on compact open subsets ofX
and finitely additive measures on clopen subsets ofX‚à™ ‚àûwith total measure 0. Moreover it is
easy to see with the triangle inequality that this bijection preservesl q-bound up to multiplication
by 2; and the resulting bijections on sets with bounds are continuous with respect to the compact
Hausdorff topologies. This gives the claim.‚ñ°
The next lemma says that the choice of compactification is immaterial in the first identification
above.
4. LECTURE IV: LIQUID TENSOR PRODUCT CALCULATIONS 41
Lemma4.6.Letf:S‚ÜÝTbe a surjection inProf, let‚àÇT‚äÇTbe a closed subset, and set
‚àÇS=f ‚àí1‚àÇT. Iff:S\‚àÇS ‚àº‚ÜíT\‚àÇT(so thatSandTcan be viewed as two different compactifications
of the same locally profinite spaceS\‚àÇS), then
M<p(S)/M<p(‚àÇS) ‚àº‚Üí M <p(T)/M <p(‚àÇT).
Proof.Comparing universal properties of mapping out, it suffices to show that
S‚äî ‚àÇS ‚àÇT=T
in the category of condensed sets.1 But indeed the equivalence relationS√ó T S‚äÇS√óSgivingTas
a quotient ofSis covered by the diagonalS‚ÜíS√ó T Sand‚àÇS√ó ‚àÇT ‚àÇSbecause of the hypothesis
f:S\‚àÇS ‚àº‚ÜíT\‚àÇT, and this gives the claim by comparing universal properties of mapping out.‚ñ°
Now we prove Proposition 4.4.
Proof.M <p(X) isp-liquid and flat because the first lemma exhibits it as a summand of
M<p(X‚à™ ‚àû), for which we know these facts by the previous lecture. If we calculateM <p(X)‚äó R<p
M<p(Y) using the presentations
M<p(X) =M <p(X‚à™ ‚àû)/M <p(‚àû),
M<p(Y) =M <p(Y‚à™ ‚àû)/M <p(‚àû)
coming from the first lemma, we obtain
M<p(X)‚äó R<p M<p(Y) =M <p((X‚à™ ‚àû)√ó(Y‚à™ ‚àû))/M <p(X√ó ‚àû ‚à™ ‚àû √óY),
but this is the same asM <p((X√óY)‚à™ ‚àû)/M <p(‚àû) by the second lemma.‚ñ°
Let us specialize to our case of main interest. LetIbe a countable set, which we view as a
locally profinite space with the discrete topology. In this case, compact open subsets are the same
as finite subsets, and a finitely additive measure on these is uniquely specified by its values on the
singeton sets, which can be arbitrary. Thus we find that
M(I) lp‚â§C ={(x i)i‚ààI |x i ‚ààR,
X
i
|xi|p ‚â§C},
as a closed subset of Q
I[‚àíC1/p, C1/p]. ThusM p(I) is simply the set of absolutelyp-summable
sequences of real numbers, equipped with a condensed structure where the ‚Äúclosed unit balls‚Äù for
thep-norms are given their natural compact Hausdorff topology.
In fact we also have analogous ‚Äúsequence spaces‚ÄùM p(I) for any 0< p‚â§ ‚àû, not necessarily
‚â§1, defined by the same description, producing a whole series:

. . .‚äÇ M 1/3(I)‚äÇ M 1(I)‚äÇ M 2(I)‚äÇ. . .‚äÇ M ‚àû(I)

‚äÇ
Y
I
R,
where the largest one isM ‚àû(I) =S
C>0
Q
I[‚àíC, C].
1In fact, this pushout also holds in condensedanima, a fact which was implicitly used in the proof of 3.15. To
deduce this from the same fact in condensed sets, it suffices to see that the pushoutS‚äî ‚àÇS ‚àÇTin condensed anima is a
condensed set. In general, the pushout in condensed anima is given by sheafifying the presheaf pushout. Sheafification
of anima sends sets to sets because it‚Äôs built from filtered colimits and limits, so it suffices to see that the pushout
S‚äî ‚àÇS ‚àÇTin presheaves of anima is a presheaf of sets. But this follows because the map‚àÇS‚ÜíSis injective.
42 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
But there is more, because each of theseM p(I) also has a (p-)Banach space analogl p(I), which
has the same underlying set
lp(I) ={(x i)i‚ààI |x i ‚ààR,
X
i
|xi|p <‚àû},
but with topology, hence condensed structure, where a basis of neighborhoods of 0 is given by the
open balls
lp(I) <Œµ ={(x i)i‚ààI |x i ‚ààR,
X
i
|xi|p < Œµ}
forŒµ >0. This produces another series of sequence spaces

. . .‚äÇl 1/3(I)‚äÇl 1(I)‚äÇl 2(I)‚äÇ. . .‚äÇl ‚àû(I)

‚äÇ
Y
I
R,
which includes termwise in the previous one by maps which are bijections on underlying sets, but
not isomorphisms of condensed sets. 2
The fact that all of these sequence spaces are pairwise non-isomorphic as condensedR-modules
encapsulates much of the subtlety of linear algebra in infinite dimensions: first, there are different
convexity types parametrized byp, and second, there is also a difference between taking compact
subsets as fundamental and taking open subsets as fundamental. However, as noticed and studied
in detail by Grothendieck, there are certain maps which completely erase these subtle distinctions.
These are callednuclear,trace-class, or(p-)summablemaps. The simplest example is the following.
Suppose given a sequence of real numbers (Œª i)i‚ààI which isp-summable, i.e. P
i |Œªi|p <‚àû. Then
foranyof the above sequence spacesV, we get an endomorphism
¬∑Œª:V‚ÜíV,
given by multiplying thei th entry by the scalarŒª i. The simple but important phenomenon is the
following.
Lemma4.7.LetIbe a countable infinite set, and letŒª= (Œª i)i‚ààI be ap-summable sequence of
real numbers. Then the map of condensedR-modules
¬∑Œª:M ‚àû(I)‚Üí M ‚àû(I)
lands insidel p(I)‚äÇ M ‚àû(I).
Proof.On underlying sets, this is clear: if we multiply a uniformly bounded sequence by a
p-summable sequence, we still get anp-summable sequence. To see that the factoring holds as
condensed sets, we need that for allC >0, the map
Y
I
[‚àíC;C]‚Üíl p(I),
(xi)7‚Üí(Œª ixi)
is continuous. But if we want to guarantee that
X
i
|Œªixi ‚àíŒª iyi|p =
X
i
|Œªi|p|xi ‚àíy i|p < Œµ,
2Actually, in this Banach picture, it might be preferable to replacel ‚àû(I) by its subspacec 0(I), the set of
null-sequences, again with topology coming from the sup norm. The reason has to do with duality; see the exercises.
4. LECTURE IV: LIQUID TENSOR PRODUCT CALCULATIONS 43
we can arrange this by takingx i andy i to be close enough foriin some finite subsetI 0 ‚äÇI, since
the remainder X
iÃ∏‚ààI0
|Œªi|p|xi ‚àíy i|p ‚â§2 pCpX
iÃ∏‚ààI0
|Œªi|p
goes to 0 asI 0 grows.3 ‚ñ°
Thus this map of multiplication by ap-summableŒªtakes us all the way from the largest measure
sequence space to thep-Banach one. In fact, we have run into a similar phenomenon before, when
discussing the space of holomorphic functions on the disk. We defined this as
O(D) ={
X
n‚â•0
cnT n |c nrn ‚Üí0‚àÄr <1} ‚äÇC[[T]].
We could replace the conditionc nrn ‚Üí0 by any number of other convergence conditions on the
sequencec nrn without affecting the definition: we could sayc nrn is bounded, is 1/3-summable, is
2-summable, etc. For fixedr <1, there is of course a difference between these convergence criteria;
but since we ask it for allr <1, they are equivalent. Indeed, suppose we take the weakest one,
where we just ask that thec nrn be uniformly bounded. If this holds for allr <1, then in particular
it holds for somer ‚Ä≤ > r. Thusc nrn is equal to a uniformly bounded sequencec nr‚Ä≤n multiplied by
the exponentially decaying sequence (r/r ‚Ä≤)n, hence it has whatever other summability property we
could ask.
This leads us to consider the following situation. Suppose given, for everyn‚ààN, anI-sequence
Œª(n) = (Œª(n)
i )i‚ààI
of real numbers which isq-summable for someq < p, with 0< p‚â§1, and consider the tower of
condensedR-modules
. . .M <p(I) ¬∑Œª(n)
‚Üí M <p(I) ¬∑Œª(n‚àí1)
‚Üí. . . ¬∑Œª(1)
‚Üí M <p(I).
For a reason which will become clear in a moment, we will also ask that allŒª (n)
i be nonzero. We
are interested in studying the inverse limit (=intersection, as the maps are injective)
V= lim‚Üê ‚àín
M<p(I)
of this tower. (ThisVdepends on theŒª (n), but we suppress this from the notation.) We make a
series of remarks about this situation:
(1) Up to a pro-isomorphism of the tower, we can assume that all theŒª (n) areq-summable,
foranygiven fixedq < p. Indeed, this can be arranged by composing maps in the tower,
for the following reason: all theŒª (n) arep-summable, but the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality
implies that ifŒªandŒª ‚Ä≤ arep-summable, then the termwise productŒª¬∑Œª ‚Ä≤ isp/2-summable.
(2) Again up to a pro-isomoprhism of the tower, we can replaceM <p(I) by any of the above
discussed sequence spaces, either of measure-type or of Banach-type. This follows from
the previous remark and Lemma 4.7.
3Compare with the fact that the identity mapM p(I)‚Üíl p(I) isnotcontinuous: if all we know is that P
i |xi|p ‚â§
C, then we cannot guarantee P
i |xi|p < Œµwith just a condition on finitely many entries.
44 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
(3) We have lim‚Üê ‚àí
1
n M<p(I) = 0, so thatV=Rlim‚Üê ‚àín M<p(I).4 Indeed, by the previous remark,
we can replace theM <p(I) by Banach sequence spaces; and moreover the transition maps
have dense image, because they contain the basis vectors for these sequence spaces due
to the hypothesis that allŒª (n)
i Ã∏= 0. Thus this lim‚Üê ‚àí
1
n claim follows from the Mittag-Leffler
lemma below.
(4) For anyp, there is a short exact sequence of condensedR-modules
0‚ÜíV‚Üí
Y
N
Mp(I) œÉ‚àíid‚àí ‚Üí
Y
N
Mp(I)‚Üí0,
where the mapœÉshifts the components using the given transition maps¬∑Œª (n). This is a
rephrasing of the vanishing of lim‚Üê ‚àí
1 for the tower with terms theM p(I), which is the same
as the previous claim because all the different sequence spaces yield isomorphic pro-towers.
(5) There is a short exact sequence of liquidp-modules
0‚ÜíV‚Üí
[
q<p
Y
N
Mq(I) œÉ‚àíid‚àí ‚Üí
[
q<p
Y
N
Mq(I)‚Üí0.
This follows by taking filtered colimits in the previous.
We used the following Mittag-Leffler lemma above:
Lemma4.8.Suppose given a tower. . .‚ÜíV n ‚ÜíV n‚àí1 ‚Üí. . .‚ÜíV 1 of Banach spaces such that
the transition maps have dense image. Then
R1 lim‚Üê ‚àín
Vn = 0
inCondAb.
Proof.We have to see that for allS‚ààExtrDisc, we have
R1 lim‚Üê ‚àín
Vn(S) = 0
in the category of abelian groups. WhenS=‚àó, this follows from the standard topological Mittag-
Leffler result, [Gro61] 13.2.4. But in fact the general case reduces to that one: eachV n(S) also has
a Banach space structure with respect to the sup norm, and each transition mapV n(S)‚ÜíV n‚àí1(S)
is still dense, as the locally constant functions are dense in the continuous functionsS‚ÜíV n‚àí1, and
locally constant functions lift up toŒµby our original density hypothesis.‚ñ°
It is this short exact sequence in (5) we will use to analyzep-liquid tensor products withV. In
fact, we have the following.
Lemma4.9.LetAandBbe two countable sets, and let(X a)a‚ààA and(Y b)b‚ààB be locally profinite
spaces parametrized byAandBrespectively. Then [
q<p
Y
a‚ààA
Mq(Xa)
!
‚äóR<p
 [
q<p
Y
b‚ààB
Mq(Yb)
!
=
[
q<p
Y
(a,b)‚ààA√óB
Mq(Xa √óY b),
and all of thesep-liquid spaces are flat.
4Here it is important that infinite products in CondAb are exact, so the standard Milnor sequence does calculate
theRlim‚Üê ‚àín‚Äôs.
4. LECTURE IV: LIQUID TENSOR PRODUCT CALCULATIONS 45
Proof.We will prove this by writing all the objects as filtered unions of measure spaces on
locally profinite sets. First note that
M<p(
G
a‚ààA
Xa)‚äÇ
Y
a‚ààA
M<p(Xa)
because by additivity a measure on F
a‚ààA Xa is determined by its values on those compact opens
which are contained in someX a. Now, given anA-sequenceC= (C a)a‚ààA of positive real numbers,
let us write
C¬∑ M <p(
G
a‚ààA
Xa)‚äÇ
Y
a‚ààA
M<p(Xa)
for the isomorphic copy ofM <p(F
a‚ààA Xa) where we multiply thea-component byC a. Then we
claim that [
q<p
Y
a‚ààA
Mq(Xa) =
[
C
C¬∑ M <p(
G
a‚ààA
Xa),
where the union is over allA-sequences of positive real numbers, which is a filtered poset under
C‚â§C ‚Ä≤ ‚áîC a ‚â§C ‚Ä≤
a‚àÄa‚ààA.
If we know this claim, then first of all we getp-liquidity and flatness of S
q<p
Q
a‚ààA Mq(Xa),
because it is a filtered colimit of modules which we already know to be flatp-liquid. But second,
using the K Ãà unneth property for measure spaces on locally profinite sets proved above and com-
mutation of tensor products with colimits, we find that the tensor product formula we‚Äôre trying
to prove reduces to the following fact: anyA√óB-sequenceE= (E a,b) of positive real numbers is
termwise‚â§one of the formC a ¬∑D b whereCis anA-sequence andDis aB-sequence. To prove
that, choose bijectionsA, B‚âÉNand let
Cn =D n = max{sup
i,j‚â§n
Ei,j,1}.
Thus we‚Äôve reduced to proving
[
q<p
Y
a‚ààA
Mq(Xa) =
[
C
C¬∑ M <p(
G
a‚ààA
Xa).
By taking the union overq, it suffices to show that
Y
a‚ààA
Mq(Xa) =
[
C
C¬∑ M q(
G
a‚ààA
Xa),
or in other words, for any givenq-summable measuresŒº a onX a for alla‚ààA, there is anA-sequence
Œµ= (Œµ a) of positive constants such that
Œº(U) :=Œµ a ¬∑Œº a(U)
forU‚äÇX a compact open specifies aq-summable measure on F
a‚ààA Xa. But indeed, ifŒº a is of
q-variation‚â§C a, then we can arrange this by takingŒµ a =Œª a ¬∑C ‚àí1
a whereŒª a is anyq-summable
A-sequence. ‚ñ°
Remark4.10.The countability hypothesis onAandBis crucial here; see the exercises.
From this we deduce the following.
46 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Theorem4.11.IfV= lim ‚Üê ‚àín M<p(I)andV ‚Ä≤ = lim‚Üê ‚àín M<p(I ‚Ä≤)are both presented as inverse lim-
its along towers where each transition map is given by termwise multiplication by someq-summable
I-sequence of nonzero real numbers for someq < p, thenVandV ‚Ä≤ are flatp-liquid modules, and
we can pull the inverse limit out of the tensor product calculation, getting
V‚äó R<p V ‚Ä≤ = lim‚Üê ‚àín
M<p(I√óI ‚Ä≤),
where then th transition map on the right is given by termwise multiplication by theI√óI ‚Ä≤-sequence
which is the product of sequences giving then th transition maps forVandV ‚Ä≤.
Proof.Remark (5) above writesVas the kernel of a map between twop-liquid modules which
are flat by the above lemma, thus giving the flatness claim. Then to calculate the tensor product,
we can use remark (5) and the tensor product calculation given by the lemma.‚ñ°
Remark4.12.More generally, the same conclusion (that the liquid tensor product commutes
with certain sequential inverse limits) applies in the more general context of nuclear Fr ÃÅ echet spaces
(cf. also Lecture VIII). SupposeVis a nuclear Fr ÃÅ echet space; thusVcan be written as a sequential
inverse limit of Hilbert spaces along trace-class transition maps with dense image. Each trace-class
map between Hilbert spaces factors through a map on the standardl 2-sequence space which can
given by termwise multiplication by a 1-summable sequence. Then as in the above discussion we
deduce that the original tower of Hilbert spaces is pro-isomorphic to a tower ofM p-spaces such
that all the transition maps factor throughM p/2 ‚äÇ M p. Given this, the same argument as above
shows that nuclear Fr ÃÅ echet spaces are flat for the liquid tensor product, and that in taking the
liquid tensor product of two nuclear Fr ÃÅ echet spaces, we can commute the defining inverse limits
past the tensor product; thus, it agrees with the usual complete tensor product of nuclear Fr ÃÅ echet
spaces.
We can now specialize this to the case of holomorphic functions on disks. Well, there is one
small wrinkle: this discussion was overR, whereas the tensor product of holomorphic functions we
want to take is overC. But this is not serious: ifO(D k)R denotes theR-subspace ofO(D k) where
the coefficients are required to lie inR, then we can write
O(Dk) =O(D k)R ‚äóR C,
so we can just as well do the calculation overRinstead. And then it falls into the purview of the
above theorem. Indeed, choosing any increasing sequence (r n) of real numbers 0< r n <1 such
thatr n ‚Üí1 asn‚Üí ‚àû, we can write
O(Dk)R = lim‚Üê ‚àín
M<q(Nk),
where then th transition map is multiplication by the exponentially decayingN k-sequence
(d1, . . . dk)7‚Üí(r n‚àí1/rn)d1+...+dk .
We deduce the desired claims:O(D k) is flat as ap-liquid space for allkandp, and
O(Dk)‚äó C<p O(Dl) =O(D k+l),
independent ofp.
4. LECTURE IV: LIQUID TENSOR PRODUCT CALCULATIONS 47
Exercise 1.We used sequence spaces to produce the condensed structure onO(D). Prove the
following more direct description: for a profinite setS, we have
O(D)(S) ={f:S√óD‚ÜíC|fis continuous, f(s,‚àí) is holomorphic‚àÄs‚ààS}.
Exercise 2.Let 0< p‚â§ ‚àûandIa countable set, and consider the internal hom in condensed
R-modules
Mp(I) ‚à® = Hom(Mp(I),R).
Show that:
(1) Ifp‚â§1, thenM p(I) ‚à® =c 0(I),the Banach space of null-sequences with sup norm.
(2) Ifp >1, thenM p(I) ‚à® =l q(I) where 1‚â§q <‚àûis such that 1
p + 1
q = 1.
Exercise 3.Let 0< p‚â§ ‚àûandIa countable set, and consider the internal hom in condensed
R-modules
lp(I) ‚à® = Hom(lp(I),R).
Show that:
(1) Ifp‚â§1, thenl p(I) ‚à® =M ‚àû(I).
(2) Ifp‚â•1, thenl p(I) ‚à® =M q(I) where 1‚â§q‚â§ ‚àûis such that 1
p + 1
q = 1.
For the next two exercises, let‚Äôs define a qs condensedR-moduleVto becountablyp-liquidif
for any countable collectionK 1, K2, . . .of qc subsets ofVand anyq < p, there is a qcq-convex
K‚äÇVsuch thatK n ‚äÇR¬∑Kfor alln. This is a strengthening of the condition saying thatVis
p-liquid.
Exercise 4.Show that anyp-Banach space is countablyp-liquid, the measure spaceM p(S)
for profiniteSis countablyp-liquid, and any countable inverse limit of countablyp-liquid spaces is
countablyp-liquid. Show also thatM <p(S) is not countablyp-liquid, and the countablyp-liquid
spaces are not closed under countable direct sum.
Exercise 5.Show that ifWis qs and countablyp-liquid, then for anyV= lim ‚Üê ‚àín M<p(I) with
transition maps given by nowhere zeroq-summableŒª (n) as in the lecture, then we can pull out the
inverse limit from the tensor product withW:
W‚äó R<p V= lim‚Üê ‚àín
W‚äó R<p M<p(I).
Moreover the lim‚Üê ‚àí
1 term vanishes. In fact, the same statement applies more generally to nuclear
Fr ÃÅ echet spacesV.
Exercise 6.Show that ifI, Jare infinite sets withIuncountable, then Y
I
R
!
‚äóR<p
 Y
J
R
!
Ã∏=
Y
I√óJ
R,
i.e. the natural map is not an isomorphism.
48 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Exercise 7.LetVbe qsp-liquid. Show that
V‚äó R<p O(D) =
[
K‚äÇVqc
\
r<1
[
C>0
Y
n‚â•0
C
rn K¬∑T n ‚äÇV[[T]].
5. LECTURE V: FROM FORMAL NONSENSE TO HOLOMORPHIC FUNCTIONS 49
5. Lecture V: From formal nonsense to holomorphic functions
The goal of this lecture is to prove Theorem 1.1:
Theorem5.1.There is a (necessarily unique) sheafO(ofp-liquidC-algebras) on the topological
spaceC, such that for any open disc
D=D(x, r) ={z‚ààC| |z‚àíx|< r} ‚äÇC,
one has
O(D) ={
‚àûX
n=0
an(T‚àíx) n |a n ‚ààC,‚àÄr ‚Ä≤ < r, anr‚Ä≤n ‚Üí0},
with obvious transition mapsO(D)‚Üí O(D ‚Ä≤)forD ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇD.
Moreover, for any such discD, the sheaf cohomology groupsH i(D,O) = 0fori >0.
The proof of this theorem will actually not require the delicate commutation of liquid tensor
products with infinite products. But we still need the idea that multiplication by rapidly decaying
sequences erases the distinction between all different kinds of sequence spaces.
Let us start with the formal nonsense. It will later be applied toD(Liq p(C[T])), the derived
category ofp-liquidC[T]-modules. 5
Construction5.2.LetCbe a closed symmetric monoidal stable‚àû-category with all colimits.
(The following construction only depends on its homotopy category, which is a closed symmetric
monoidal triangulated category with all direct sums, and for most of the discussion such data would
be good enough; but some of the later things work better with stable‚àû-categories.) Consider the
collection of idempotent algebra objects inC; equivalently, these are pairs of an objectA‚ààC
together with a map 1‚ÜíAsuch that the induced mapA‚ÜíA‚äóAis an isomorphism. (Indeed, in
that caseAadmits a unique and functorialE ‚àû-algebra structure.) For any suchAandA ‚Ä≤, there
is at most one mapA‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤ commuting with the maps from 1. Indeed, if there is such a map
f:A‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤, then 1‚ÜíA
f
‚àí ‚ÜíA‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤ (where the last map is obtained by tensoring 1‚ÜíAwith
A‚Ä≤) induces via tensoring withA ‚Ä≤ maps
A‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤ ‚äóA ‚Ä≤ =A ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤ ‚äóA ‚Ä≤ =A‚äóA ‚Ä≤,
where the composite of the first two (resp. the last two) maps is an isomorphism. It follows that
all maps are isomorphisms, and henceA ‚Ä≤ maps isomorphically toA‚äóA ‚Ä≤, and the mapfis given
by the canonical mapA‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤ ‚àº= A‚Ä≤. In particular, the‚àû-category of such idempotent algebras
is naturally a poset.
Actually, we get a ‚Äúlocale‚Äù. Recall that a locale is a ‚Äúpointless topological space‚Äù: One directly
axiomatizes the collection of closed subsets, subject to the condition that one can form finite
unions and arbitrary intersections, satisfying some simple conditions (notably infinite intersections
distribute over unions with a fixed closed subset). (Usually, one rather axiomatizes the collection
5This abstract discussion is closely related to the work of Ben-Bassat‚ÄìKremnizer, who emphasized the importance
of idempotent algebras (in their language ‚Äúhomotopy epimorphisms‚Äù) in derived analytic geometry, see for example
[BBK17], [BBBK18]. In fact, already in 1972 Taylor [T ay72] suggested very similar ideas; one could say that in
this lecture we simply rephrase his ideas in modern language. We believe that one could also carry out the proof of
Theorem 1.1 in the language of Ben-Bassat‚ÄìKremnizer, i.e. without liquid modules, but instead using their (stable
‚àû-category)D(Ind(Banach)) freely generated by Banach spaces, and their site of homotopy epimorphisms, but we
have not investigated the details.
50 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
of open subsets, but they are in canonical bijection, and in our example it feels more natural to
consider the closed subsets.)
Proposition5.3.The above construction defines a localeS(C)whose closed subsetsZ‚äÇ S(C)
correspond to idempotent algebrasA, so that
(1)Z‚à©Z ‚Ä≤ corresponds toA‚äóA ‚Ä≤;
(2)Z‚äÇZ ‚Ä≤ if and only ifA‚äóA ‚Ä≤ =A;
(3)Z‚à™Z ‚Ä≤ =Z‚äî Z‚à©Z ‚Ä≤ Z‚Ä≤ corresponds to[A‚äïA ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤];
(4) T
i Zi corresponds tolim‚àí ‚Üíi Ai.
Remark5.4.This construction goes back at least to the work of Balmer‚ÄìFavi [BF11], and has
been investigated in detail by Balmer‚ÄìKrause‚ÄìStevenson [BKS20]. These works however generally
assume that all compact objects are dualizable, which will be very false in our situation of interest.
Proof.All assertions reduce to direct computations. The infinite distributive law follows from
the commutation of finite limits with arbitrary colimits in a stable‚àû-category (as finite limits are
also finite colimits). ‚ñ°
Now to any closedZ‚äÇ S(C), corresponding to an idempotent algebraA‚ààC, we can associate
a full sub-‚àû-category
C(Z) = Mod A(C) ={X‚ààC|X ‚àº= X‚äóA} ‚äÇC.
(Indeed, ifXis anA-module, thenX‚ÜíX‚äóAis an isomorphism asAis idempotent; and
conversely, ifX‚ÜíX‚äóAis an isomorphism thenXacquires a unique structure ofA-module from
X‚äóA.) We write
iZ‚àó :C(Z)‚ÜíC
for this full inclusion. It admits a left adjoint
i‚àó
Z :C‚ÜíC(Z) :X7‚ÜíX‚äóA
and a right adjoint
i!
Z :C‚ÜíC(Z) :X7‚ÜíRHom C(A, X).
Formally denoting byUthe ‚Äúcomplementary open‚Äù ofZ, we define the Verdier quotient
C(U) =C/C(Z).
This comes with a localization functor denoted
j‚àó
U :C‚ÜíC(U)
which admits a fully faithful left adjoint
jU! :C(U)‚ÜíC
determined by
jU! j‚àó
U X= [X‚ÜíX‚äóA]
and a fully faithful right adjoint
jU‚àó :C(U)‚ÜíC
determined by
jU‚àó j‚àó
U X= RHom C([1‚ÜíA], X).
5. LECTURE V: FROM FORMAL NONSENSE TO HOLOMORPHIC FUNCTIONS 51
In particular, there are functorial distinguished triangles
jU! j‚àó
U X‚ÜíX‚Üíi Z‚àói‚àó
ZX
and
iZ‚àói!
ZX‚ÜíX‚Üíj U‚àó j‚àó
U X.
In particular, this formal nonsense produces a structure sheaf onS(C):
Proposition5.5.The functorU7‚ÜíC(U)defines a sheaf of‚àû-categories on the localeS(C).
In particular, for anyX‚ààC, the functor
U7‚ÜíX(U) :=j U‚àó j‚àó
U X‚ààC
defines a sheaf onS(C)with values inC. In particular, applied toX= 1the unit object ofC, this
gives a ‚Äústructure sheaf‚Äù onS(C).
Proof.The sheaf property can be stated in two pieces. First, for any two openU,U ‚Ä≤, one
gets a cartesian diagram
C(U‚à™U ‚Ä≤) //

C(U)

C(U ‚Ä≤) // C(U‚à©U ‚Ä≤).
To show this, consider the corresponding idempotent algebrasAandA ‚Ä≤. For fully faithfulness, one
needs to see that for allX‚ààC(U‚à™U ‚Ä≤) (considered as a full subcategory ofCviaj U‚à™U ‚Ä≤‚àó), the
square
X //

RHom([1‚ÜíA], X)

RHom([1‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤], X) // RHom([1‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤], X)
is cartesian. But this reduces toX= RHom ([1‚ÜíB], X) whereB= [A‚äïA ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚äóA ‚Ä≤] corresponds
toU‚à™U ‚Ä≤. Essential surjectivity reduces to a similar straightforward computation.
The other thing to check is that for a filtered unionU= S
i Ui, the functor
C(U)‚Üílim‚Üê ‚àíi
C(U i)
is an isomorphism (where in fact all transition functors are full inclusions, so the limit is an inter-
section). Again, fully faithfulness reduces toX‚Üílim ‚Üê ‚àíi RHom([1‚ÜíA i], X) being an isomorphism
(whereU i corresponds toA i). But the right-hand side is RHom ([1‚ÜíA], X) forA= lim‚àí ‚Üíi Ai, which
corresponds toU. As both categoriesC(U) and lim ‚Üê ‚àíi C(U i) are full subcategories ofC, essential
surjectivity reduces to the assertion that ifX‚ààCis such thatX= RHom ([1‚ÜíA i], X) for alli,
then alsoX= RHom ([1‚ÜíA], X), which follows by passage to limits.‚ñ°
Now we want to apply this formal nonsense toC=D(Liq p(C[T])). To get things off the
ground, we need examples of idempotent algebras, which ought to correspond to the closed subsets
52 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
{|T| ‚â§1}and{|T| ‚â•1}. For this, we take the corresponding ‚Äúrings of overconvergent holomorphic
functions‚Äù. Concretely, let
A({|T| ‚â§1}) :=
[
r>1
{
‚àûX
n=0
anT n |a n ‚ààC, a nrn ‚Üí0}=
[
r>1
M<p({T n/rn}n‚â•0)
and
A({|T| ‚â•1}) :=
[
r<1
{
X
n<<‚àû
anT n |a n ‚ààC, a nrn ‚Üí0}=
[
r<1
[
m‚â•0
M<p({T n/rn}n‚â§m).
The following is the only real computation we need to do.
Proposition5.6.The liquidC[T]-algebrasA({|T| ‚â§1})andA({|T| ‚â•1})are idempotent.
The corresponding localization ofC[T]is given by
O({|T|>1}) =
[
m‚â•0
\
r>1
{
‚àí‚àûX
n=m
anT n |a n ‚ààC, a nrn ‚Üí0}=
[
m‚â•0
\
r>1
M<p({T n/rn}n‚â§m)
resp.
O({|T|<1}) =
\
r<1
{
‚àûX
n=0
anT n |a n ‚ààC, a nrn ‚Üí0}=
\
r<1
M<p({T n/rn}n‚â•0) =O(D(0,1)).
We note that in the first case, the localization gives only those holomorphic functions that are
meromorphic at‚àû‚Äî generally, the algebraicity at the boundary is remembered (which is what
makes GAGA theorems in the affine case possible).
Proof.We first show thatA({|T| ‚â§1}) is idempotent. This implies thatA({|T| ‚â•1}) is
idempotent as well, as it is in fact aC[T ¬±1]-algebra obtained from the first by base change along
T7‚ÜíT ‚àí1. Now, asp-liquidC-vector spaces, the tensor product ofA=A({|T| ‚â§1}) with itself is
[
r1,r2>1
M<p({T nU m/rn
1 rm
2 }n,m‚â•0) =
[
r>1
{
‚àûX
n,m=0
an,mT nU m |a n,m ‚ààC, a n,mrn+m ‚Üí0}
where the equality again follows as all transition maps multiply by rapidly decaying sequences.
Now, to compute the tensor product overC[T] instead, we need to mod out by the idealU‚àíT
(whereU‚àíTis evidently a nonzerodivisor). It is now a simple exercise that
[
r>1
{
‚àûX
n,m=0
an,mT nU m |a n,m ‚ààC, a n,mrn+m ‚Üí0}/(U‚àíT)‚Üí
[
r>1
{
‚àûX
n=0
anT n |a n ‚ààC, a nrn ‚Üí0}
is an isomorphism. Indeed, for all elements in the kernel, one can explicitly write down division by
U‚àíT, and checks a very simple convergence condition.
It remains to compute the corresponding localizations. Here, it is enough to do it in the second
case: Indeed, the first localization must be aC[T ¬±1]-algebra, which is necessarily obtained from
the second localization via base change alongT7‚ÜíT ‚àí1. Thus, we need to compute
RHomC[T] ([C[T]‚ÜíA({|T| ‚â•1})],C[T]).
5. LECTURE V: FROM FORMAL NONSENSE TO HOLOMORPHIC FUNCTIONS 53
Note thatC[T] injects intoA({|T| ‚â•1}), with quotient
[
r<1
M<p({T n/rn}n<0).
Commuting the union with the dual, we get
Rlim‚Üê ‚àír<1
RHomC[T] (M<p({T n/rn}n<0),C[T])[1].
To compute the dual, we first compute the dual overC(instead ofC[T]). Then, asM <p(N) is
internally compact projective in Liqp‚à©CondAbœâ1, the internal RHom sits in degree 0, and commutes
with the infinite direct sumC[T] = L
m‚â•0 C¬∑T m. RenamingTbyUtemporarily, we get
RHomC(M<p({T n/rn}n<0),C[U]) =
M
m‚â•0
C0({T n/rn}n<0,C)¬∑U m.
The spaceC 0({T n/rn}n<0,C) of continuous maps vanishing at‚àûis naturally anl 0-sequence space
with basis (T n/rn)n>0. To compute the internal RHom overC[T] instead, we need to quotient by
T‚àíU. This will reintroduce theT 0-term, and in the limit overrwe get
Rlim‚Üê ‚àír<1
C0({T n/rn}n‚â•0,C).
By the last lecture, the derived limit is concentrated in degree 0, and the precise choice of sequence
space does not matter, so we get
O({|T|<1}) =
\
r<1
{
‚àûX
n=0
anT n |a n ‚ààC, a nrn ‚Üí0}=
\
r<1
M<p({T n/rn}n‚â•0).‚ñ°
In order to apply this, we need to get some understanding ofS(C[T]) :=S(D(Liq p(C[T]))). It
is impossible to describe this whole locale, as there are way too many idempotent algebras: One
can give many different growth conditions on the coefficientsa n that define idempotent algebras.
(This makes it possible to localize to very precise growth conditions, and hence analyze algebras
of power series with growth conditions that are not convergent for any value ofTinC! In other
words, the formulas still make sense, even if they do not define functions.) We will restrict to the
part of the locale that can be probed with obvious variants of the above idempotent algebras.
In fact, we slightly generalize the setting, and consider any (abstract, i.e. noncondensed)C-
algebraR, and the corresponding localeS(R) =S(D(Liq p(R))).6 For anyf‚ààR, we get the map
C[T]‚ÜíRsendingTtof. This defines a map
S(R)‚Üí S(C[T])
(in terms of idempotent algebras, this amounts to base changing them fromC[T] toR). In partic-
ular, we can define closed subsets
{|f| ‚â§1},{|f| ‚â•1} ‚äÇ S(R)
as the preimages of
{|T| ‚â§1},{|T| ‚â•1} ‚äÇ S(C[T]).
6We could also consider liquidC-algebras, but for the moment the whole discussion will only use the underlying
abstractC-algebra.
54 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
As further notation, for anyr >0, we write
{|f| ‚â§r}:={|f /r| ‚â§1} ‚äÇ S(R),{|f| ‚â•r}:={|f /r| ‚â•1} ‚äÇ S(R).
A priori, it is unclear how these different subsets ofS(R) interact; each such question is a
question about the behaviour of the corresponding idempotent algebras. There are some obvious
expected properties that are simple to verify:
Proposition5.7.Letf, g‚ààR,Œ±‚ààCandr, s >0.
(1){|f| ‚â§1}= T
r>1{|f| ‚â§r}and{|f| ‚â•1}= T
r<1{|f| ‚â•r};
(2){|f| ‚â§1} ‚à™ {|f| ‚â•1}=S(R);
(3) forr <1, one has{|f| ‚â§r} ‚à© {|f| ‚â•1}=‚àÖ;
(4){|f| ‚â§1} ‚à© {|g| ‚â§1} ‚äÇ {|f g| ‚â§1};
(5){|f| ‚â•1} ‚à© {|g| ‚â•1} ‚äÇ {|f g| ‚â•1};
(6){|Œ±| ‚â§1}=S(R)if|Œ±| ‚â§1;
(7){|Œ±| ‚â•1}=S(R)if|Œ±| ‚â•1;
(8){|f| ‚â§r} ‚à© {|g| ‚â§s} ‚äÇ {|f+g| ‚â§r+s}.
Proof.Each of these follows by unraveling definitions, and is a nice exercise. Let us do some
to give the spirit. For (1), it suffices to do the first in the universal caseC[T] withf=T, and then
recall that intersections of closed subsets correspond to filtered colimits of idempotent algebras,
and then this follows directly from the definition of the idempotent algebrasA({|T| ‚â§1}) and
A({|T| ‚â•1}). For (2), again we can assumef=T‚ààR=C[T]. The union{|T| ‚â§1} ‚à™ {|T| ‚â•1}
corresponds to the idempotent algebra
[A({|T| ‚â§1})‚äïA({|T| ‚â•1})‚ÜíA({|T| ‚â§1})‚äó C[T] <p A({|T| ‚â•1})].
Now one first computes that
A({|T| ‚â§1})‚äó C[T] <p A({|T| ‚â•1}) =
[
r>1,s<1
{
‚àûX
n=‚àí‚àû
anT n |a nsn n‚Üí‚àí‚àû‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚Üí0, anrn n‚Üí‚àû‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚Üí0}
are the overconvergent holomorphic functions on{|T|= 1}. This is a simple analogue of the
idempotence ofA({|T| ‚â§1}). Splitting this according to negative and nonnegative powers ofT,
one sees that the map
A({|T| ‚â§1})‚äïA({|T| ‚â•1})‚ÜíA({|T| ‚â§1})‚äó C[T] <p A({|T| ‚â•1})
is surjective, and that the only elements in the kernel areC[T], which gives the idempotent algebra
C[T] corresponding to all ofS(C[T]).
We omit the proofs of (3)‚Äì(7). For (8), it suffices to consider the universal caseC[f, g],
i.e.C[T, U] withf=Tandg=U. The left-hand side corresponds to the algebra
[
r‚Ä≤>r,s‚Ä≤>s
{
X
n,m‚â•0
an,mT nU m |a n,mr‚Ä≤ns‚Ä≤m ‚Üí0},
the right-hand side to the algebra
C[T, U]‚äó C[V]
[
t>r+s
{
X
n
anV n |a ntn ‚Üí0}
5. LECTURE V: FROM FORMAL NONSENSE TO HOLOMORPHIC FUNCTIONS 55
where the mapC[V]‚ÜíC[T, U] sendsVtoT+U. It is enough to construct a map
[
t>r+s
{
X
n
anV n |a ntn ‚Üí0} ‚Üí
[
r‚Ä≤>r,s‚Ä≤>s
{
X
n,m‚â•0
an,mT nU m |a n,mr‚Ä≤ns‚Ä≤m ‚Üí0}
linear overC[V]‚ÜíC[T, U] :V7‚ÜíT+U. But this sends P
n anV n to
X
n‚â•0
an(T+U) n =
X
n‚â•0
nX
m=0
an
 n
m

T mU n‚àím =
X
n,m‚â•0
an+m
n+m
n

T nU m.
Now ifa ntn ‚Üí0 for somet > r+sthen if we chooser ‚Ä≤ > rands ‚Ä≤ > sso thatt‚â•r ‚Ä≤ +s ‚Ä≤ then also
|an+m|
n+m
n

r‚Ä≤ns‚Ä≤m ‚â§ |a n+m|(r‚Ä≤ +s ‚Ä≤)n+m ‚â§ |a n+m|tn+m
converges to 0, giving the desired map.‚ñ°
Let us unravel what this means forS(C[T]).
Corollary5.8.On the open subsetU= S
r>0{|T|< r} ‚äÇ S(C[T]), one gets a unique
continuous map
U
|T|
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíR‚â•0
so that the preimage of[0, r]is{|T| ‚â§r}and the preimage of[r,‚àû)is{|T| ‚â•r} ‚à©U.
Indeed, this follows from Proposition 5.7 and the following general lemma.
Lemma5.9.LetSbe any locale. Then mapsS ‚ÜíR ‚â•0 are equivalent to collections of closed
subsetsS(‚â§r),S(‚â•r)‚äÇ Sfor allr >0, subject to the following conditions:
(1) For allr >0, one hasS(‚â§r) = T
s>r S(‚â§s)andS(‚â•r) = T
s<r S(‚â•s).
(2) Forr < s, one hasS(‚â§r)‚äÇ S(‚â§s),S(‚â•s)‚äÇ S(‚â•r),S(‚â§r)‚à© S(‚â•s) =‚àÖand
S(‚â•r)‚à™ S(‚â§s) =S.
(3) One has T
r S(‚â•r) =‚àÖasrgets large.
Here, a mapf:S ‚ÜíR ‚â•0 is mapped toS(‚â§r) =f ‚àí1([0, r])andS(‚â•r) =f ‚àí1([r,‚àû)).
Proof.It is clear thatfis uniquely determined by this collection of closed subsets, and
they satisfy these condition. We need to see that conversely, any such collection of closed subsets
determines a mapf:S ‚ÜíR ‚â•0. Using ((2) and) (3), we can writeSas the (increasing) union of
the open sublocalesS \ S(‚â•r), and it suffices to construct the map on each of those; we can thus
assume thatS(‚â•r) =‚àÖforrlarge. We can then replaceR ‚â•0 by some interval [0, c]. Now any
closed subsetZof [0, c] can be written as a cofiltered intersection of closed subsets that are finite
unions of closed intervals, and whose interior containsZ; and any two such cofiltered systems are
cofinal. One already knows where to send intervals, hence their finite unions (which for disjoint
intervals are disjoint by (2)) and hence their cofiltered intersections (as maps of locales commute
with those). It is easy to see that this determines a map of locales. One needs to see that it recovers
the given closed subsets, and for this one uses condition (1).‚ñ°
In fact, we get the following more refined corollary. Here, we consider the Berkovich spectrum
MBerk(R) ={| ¬∑ |:R‚ÜíR ‚â•0 | |f g|=|f||g|,|f+g| ‚â§ |f|+|g|,| ¬∑ || C =| ¬∑ | C}
of bounded multiplicative seminorms, equipped with the closed subspace topology from Q
f‚ààR R‚â•0
(cf. [Ber90]).
56 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Corollary5.10.The map
U
|f| f‚ààC[T]
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚Üí
Y
f‚ààC[T]
R‚â•0
factors over the Berkovich spectrumM Berk(C[T]).
Proof.First note thatU‚äÇ S
r>0{|f|< r}for allf‚ààC[T], using the triangle inequality.
This means that the map is well-defined. The condition to factor over the Berkovich spectrum is a
collection of many conditions, each of which pertains only to at most two|f|,|g|: Namely, for any
f, g‚ààC[T], we need to see that
U
|f|,|g|,|f+g|,|f g|
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíR4
‚â•0
factors over the closed subset{(x, y, s, p)|xy=p, s‚â§x+y} ‚äÇR 4
‚â•0. This follows easily from the
conditions of Proposition 5.7.‚ñ°
So far, everything would have worked in exactly the same way over a nonarchimedean field like
Q2 in place ofC. The crucial difference is in the identification of the Berkovich spectrum, which is
extremely simple forC-algebras.
Theorem5.11 (Ostrowski, [Ost17]).LetRbe anyC-algebra. Then any multiplicative semi-
norm| ¬∑ | ‚àà M Berk(R)is given as a composite
R
f
‚àí ‚ÜíC
|¬∑|C
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíR‚â•0
for a uniqueC-algebra homomorphismR‚ÜíC, inducing a homeomorphism
MBerk(R) = HomC(R,C).
Before giving the proof, we note that this finishes the proof of Theorem 5.1: We get a map
S(C[T])‚äÉU‚Üí M Berk(C[T]) ‚àº= HomC(C[T],C) =C
and the pushforward of (the restriction toUof) the structure sheaf ofS(C[T]) toCis the desired
sheaf, by the simple computation of Proposition 5.6.
Proof of Theorem 5.11.We note that this is usually regarded as a consequence of the
Gelfand‚ÄìMazur theorem, which in turn is usually proved by complex analysis. To avoid any vicious
circles, we use the following elementary argument going back to Ostrowski.
The kernel of| ¬∑ |is an ideal; quotienting it out, we can assume that|x|= 0 only ifx= 0.
Our goal is then to show thatR=C. Take anyx‚ààR. By the triangle inequality, the function
C‚ÜíR ‚â•0 :z7‚Üí |x‚àíz|is continuous and gets large for large|z|, so attains a minimum. Replacing
xby somex‚àíz, we can thus assume that for allz‚ààC, one has|x‚àíz| ‚â• |x|. Our goal is then to
show thatx= 0, for which it suffices that|x|= 0. If not, we can rescalexby an element ofR >0
so that|x|= 2. For any integern, consider the equation
xn ‚àí1 =
n‚àí1Y
i=0
(x‚àíŒ∂ i
n).
Taking absolute values, we find
2n + 1‚â• |x n ‚àí1|=
n‚àí1Y
i=0
|x‚àíŒ∂ i
n| ‚â•2 n‚àí1|x‚àí1| ‚â•2 n
5. LECTURE V: FROM FORMAL NONSENSE TO HOLOMORPHIC FUNCTIONS 57
as all|x‚àíŒ∂ i
n| ‚â• |x|= 2. Taking the limitn‚Üí ‚àû, we find|x‚àí1|= 2. Thus, by induction
2 =|x|=|x‚àí1|=|x‚àí2|=. . . ,
which is impossible (for example as|x‚àí5| ‚â•5‚àí |x|= 3).‚ñ°
We note that it is exactly in this final line that we used that we are doing archimedean geometry
as opposed to non-archimedean geometry! In non-archimedean geometry, everything works in the
same way, but there is no analogue of Ostrowski‚Äôs theorem; there are many other multiplicative
seminorms in nonarchimedean geometry. From our point of view, the natural underlying space for
analytic spaces is something like the Berkovich spectrum, and it is only a weird coincidence that
in complex geometry, this happens to agree with the ‚Äúclassical points‚Äù.
Exercise 1.Show that any idempotent algebra inD(Z) is a localizationZ[1/S] ofZ(for some
multiplicative setS). Deduce that the localeS(D(Z)) is given by the opposite of Spec(Z) (i.e., the
same constructible topology, but with the order of specializations reversed). Describe the sheaf of
‚àû-categories onS(D(Z)).
Exercise 2.Show that for any noetherian ringR, the localeS(D(R)) is given by the opposite
of Spec(R).
Exercise 3.Give an example of a commutative ringRand an idempotent algebraA‚àà D(R)
that is not accounted for by the mapS(D(R))‚ÜíSpec(R) op. (Hint: Almost mathematics.)
58 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Appendix to Lecture V: Spectral Theory
In this short appendix, we show how the techniques of the lecture also give a proof of the basic
result on spectral theory:
Theorem5.12.LetVbe a nonzero complex quasi-Banach space, and letT:V‚ÜíVbe an
endomorphism. Then the set of allx‚ààCfor whichT‚àíxis not invertible is a nonempty compact
subset ofC.
The set of all suchxis usually called the spectrum ofT. The key statement here is the really
the nonemptiness of the spectrum.
We will deduce this as a consequence of two propositions.
Proposition5.13.LetVbe a complex quasi-Banach space and letT:V‚ÜíVbe an endomor-
phism. Then theC[T]-module structure onVextends to a module structure overO({|T| ‚â§r})for
some large enoughr >0.
Proof.Letrbe the norm ofT. Then any sum P
n‚â•0 anT n witha nr‚Ä≤n ‚Üí0 for somer ‚Ä≤ > r
gives a well-defined endomorphism ofV.‚ñ°
Thus, it suffices to prove the following slight generalization of Theorem 5.12:
Proposition5.14.LetVbe a nonzerop-liquidC-vector space such that any endomorphism
U:V‚ÜíVhas the property that theC[U]-module structure onVextends to a module structure
overO({|U| ‚â§r})for some large enoughr >0. LetT:V‚ÜíVbe an endomorphism.
Then the set of allx‚ààCfor whichT‚àíxis not an isomorphism agrees with the minimal closed
subsetZ‚äÇCsuch thatV‚ààC=D(Liq p(C[T]))is contained inC(Z). Moreover,Zis a nonempty
compact subset ofC.
Proof.Clearly ifVis contained in someC(Z), thenT‚àíxis invertible for allxÃ∏‚ààZ. For
the converse, we note that ifU= (T‚àíx) ‚àí1 exists, thenVis also a module overO({|U| ‚â§r ‚Ä≤})
for somer ‚Ä≤ >0. Reinterpreting in terms ofT=U ‚àí1 ‚àíx, this means thatVis a module over
O({|T‚àíx| ‚â•r ‚Ä≤‚àí1}). This implies that the spectrumZis closed, andVis contained inC(Z). Also,
the spectrum is bounded asVis a module overO({|T| ‚â§r}) for somer >0, so the spectrum is
actually compact.
But asVis a nonzero object contained inC(Z), it follows thatZmust be nonempty!‚ñ°
The following is a standard corollary. We note that we did not use any of this before. (We only
used the existence of infinitely many roots of unity; but for example all 2-power roots of unity can
be written down explicitly by radicals.)
Corollary5.15 (Fundamental Theorem of Algebra; Gelfand‚ÄìMazur Theorem).The field of
complex numbersCis algebraically closed. In fact, any (quasi-)Banach field overCis equal toC
itself.
Proof.LetKbe a quasi-Banach field overC. Take anyT‚ààK\C. By spectral theory, there
is somex‚ààCfor whichT‚àíxis not invertible. But in a field, this meansT‚àíx= 0, i.e.T=x.‚ñ°
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 59
6. Lecture VI: Analytification and GAGA
Let‚Äôs recap what happened last time. To any cocomplete closed symmetric monoidal stable
‚àû-categoryC, we assigned a localeS(C) whose poset of ‚Äúclosed subsets‚Äù identifies, by definition,
with the opposite of the poset of idempotent algebras inC, i.e. if there is a (necessarily unique)
homomorphismA‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤ of idempotent algebras, then the corresponding closed subsets have the
inclusion relationZ‚äÉZ ‚Ä≤ (roughly, think ofAas functions onZ).
We also showed thatClocalizes on this locale: to an openU‚äÇ S(C) we assign the quotient
category
C(U) :=C/Mod A(C)
whereAis the idempotent algebra corresponding the closed complement ofU, and we had the
result thatU7‚ÜíC(U) is a sheaf of (cocomplete closed symmetric monoidal)‚àû-categories onS(C).
In particular, by passing to endomorphisms of the unit objects, we get a ‚Äústructure sheaf‚Äù onS(C).
We then specialized this abstract nonsense to the caseC=D(Liq p(C[T])), getting the locale
S(C[T]) :=S(D(Liq p(C[T]))). For everyr >0, we produced closed subsets
{|T| ‚â§r},{|T| ‚â•r} ‚äÇ S(C[T]),
given by idempotent algebras of holomorphic functions which overconverge on the disk of radiusr
(in the first case), or which overconverge on the exterior of the disk of radiusrand are meromorphic
at‚àû(in the second case).
For any (discrete commutative)C-algebraRand anyf‚ààR, we can then consider the closed
subsets
{|f| ‚â§r},{|f| ‚â•r} ‚äÇ S(R)
obtained by base-changing the previous ones along the mapC[T]‚ÜíR,T7‚Üíf. We also showed that
these subsets satisfy relations which reflect the triangle inequality, multiplicativity, and behavior
on complex scalars expected of such a formal expression ‚Äú|f|‚Äù. For example there is an inclusion
of closed subsets
{|f| ‚â§r} ‚à© {|g| ‚â§r ‚Ä≤} ‚äÇ {|f+g| ‚â§r+r ‚Ä≤},
for allf, g‚ààRandr, r ‚Ä≤ >0, which reflects the triangle inequality.
Next we consider, forf‚ààR, the open subset
S(R, f) =
[
r>0
{|f|< r} ‚äÇ S(R).
We can think of this as the open subset ofS(R) on whichfbehaves like an analytic variable as
opposed to an algebraic variable. In particular, in the ringO(S(R, f)), expressions of the form
œÜ(f), for any entire holomorphic functionœÜ, have well-defined meaning, while inO(S(R)) =Rwe
can only evaluatefon polynomials.
Thanks to the multiplicativity and triangle inequality, we have
S(R, f g),S(R, f+g)‚äÉ S(R, f)‚à© S(R, g).
It follows that ifRis finite type, generated byX 1, . . . Xn, then the ‚Äúsubset‚Äù
S(R, R) :=
\
f‚ààR
S(R, f)
60 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
is is in fact an open subset ofS(R), being equal to the finite intersection
n\
i=1
S(R, Xi).
We can think of thisS(R, R) as some kind of ‚Äúanalytification‚Äù of Spec(R): we have forced all the
functionsf‚ààRto be analytic.
To make an explicit connection to the usual analytification, recall also from the previous lecture
that there is a natural map of locales
S(R, R)‚Üí M Berk(R) ‚àº= Spec(R)(C) =V(I)‚äÇC n,
where we takeR=C[X 1, . . . , Xn]/Ifinite type. This map of locales was uniquely characterized by
the fact that forf‚ààRandr >0, this sends the honest open subsets
{|f|< r},{|f|> r} ‚äÇV(I)
to the formally defined open subsets of the localeS(R, R) which we gave the same notation{|f|<
r},{|f|> r}, in some sense justifying this notation.
By pushforward along this map of localesS(R, R)‚ÜíSpec(R)(C), we deduce a sheaf of (cocom-
plete closed symmetric stable monoidal)‚àû-categories on Spec(R)(C). This in particular yields a
‚Äústructure sheaf‚Äù on Spec(R)(C) with values in commutative algebra objects ofD(Liq p), by taking
endomorphisms of the unit in these categories. The last thing we saw in the previous lecture was
the calculation of this structure sheaf whenR=C[T]: namely, its value on an open disk is the
usual algebra of convergent power series on that disk, as expected from the analytification of the
affine line.
The first thing we want to do here is generalize this calculation to arbitrary finite typeC-
algebrasR. In the previous lecture we did the calculation onR=C[T] by using the formal fact
that the localization to the open subset corresponding to an idempotent algebraAinCis given
by RHom([1‚ÜíA],‚àí). But this method is more complicated to carry out forR=C[X 1, . . . , Xn]:
the corresponding idempotent algebraAcutting outS(R, R) lives in cohomological degrees [0, n],
calculated by iterating the operationA 1, A2 7‚ÜíA 1 √óA1‚äóA2 A2 describing unions of closed subsets,
and it becomes annoying to perform this preliminary calculation, let alone the resulting RHom
calculation.
Fortunately, there is another method, which is no more difficult forC[X 1, . . . , Xn] than for
C[T]. The idea is very simple: intuitively speaking, we should have
{|T|<1}=
[
r<1
{|T| ‚â§r}.
This is a cover of an open subset by closed subsets, but since it is refined by the open cover
{|T|<1}=
[
r<1
{|T|< r},
it should be just as good for calculating the structure sheaf. Taking the idea that the structure sheaf
on the closed subset{|T| ‚â§r}should be the corresponding idempotent algebraO hol({|T| ‚â§r}) of
overconvergent holomorphic functions, this gives
O({|T|<1}) =Rlim‚Üê ‚àír<1
Ohol({|T| ‚â§r}),
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 61
yielding the desired resultO({|T|<1}) =O hol({|T|<1}) (using pro-isomorphisms and Mittag-
Leffler, as previously discussed).
The problem is that in the locale picture, open subsets and closed subsets are just formal
gadgets in formal bijection with one another, and we haven‚Äôt said what it means for one to be
contained in another in a way which justifies the above intuitive calculation. But we will introduce
another formal framework which does this, and deduce the following general result.
Theorem6.1.LetR=C[X 1, . . . , Xn]/Ibe a finite typeC-algebra. Takez= (z 1, . . . , zn)‚àà
V(R)‚äÇC n andr= (r 1, . . . , rn)withr i >0for alli, parametrizing the open polydiskD(z, r)of
polyradiusrcentered atz(implicitly, intersected withV(I)). Then:
(1) For the sheaf of categories onSpec(R)(C) =V(I)described above, we have
C(D(z, r)) = lim‚Üê ‚àír‚Ä≤<r
ModOhol(D(z,r ‚Ä≤))/I(D(Liqp(C))).
(2) For the structure sheaf we get
O(D(z, r)) =O hol(D(z, r))/I.
Moreover, for the global sections we similarly have
C(V(I)) = lim‚Üê ‚àír
ModOhol(D(0,r))/I (D(Liqp(C)))
and
O(V(I)) =O hol(Cn)/I.
HereO hol(D(z, r‚Ä≤)) (resp.O hol(D(z, r))) is ring of power series innvariables centered atz
which overconverge on the polydisk of radiusr ‚Ä≤, (resp. converge on the open polydisk of radiusr),
andO hol(Cn) is the ring of power series which converge on all ofC n.
This theorem shows that we can reduce the study of our sheaf of categories to the study of
the ‚Äúpurely algebraic‚Äù categories of modules over various rings (of overconvergent functions, in the
base liquid category). This is an important complement to the formal flexibility provided by the
locale picture and its associated descent.
Remark6.2.Note that the valueC(D(z, r)) differs from the ‚Äúnaive guess‚Äù of
ModOhol(D(z,r))/I (D(Liqp(C))),
the category of modules over the value of the structure sheaf onD(z, r). In fact,C(D(z, r)) is
smaller than this naive guess: the natural functor
ModOhol(D(z,r))/I (D(Liqp(C)))‚ÜíC(D(z, r))
is a nontrivial localization.
However, the sheaf of categoriesC(‚àí) onV(I) is nonetheless canonically determined by just
the structure sheaf (of commutative algebras inD(Liq p(C))): for example, we can describeC(‚àí)
as thesheafificationof this naive guess
D(z, r)7‚ÜíMod Ohol(D(z,r))/I (D(Liqp(C))).
(Another description will be given in the exercises.) This is not a general feature of the formalism,
but it follows in this case from the statement of the theorem.
62 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
To prove this theorem, as indicated above, we will find a framework in which we can work
with ‚Äúopen subsets‚Äù and ‚Äúclosed subsets‚Äù on equal footing. We will take the following maximalist
approach.7
Definition6.3.Let Sym denote the (very large)‚àû-category of cocomplete closed symmet-
ric monoidal stable‚àû-categories, with morphisms the symmetric monoidal cocontinuous functors
between them. We denote such functors by formal expressions such as
f ‚àó :C‚ÜíD,
and we will then write simplyffor the same morphism, considered as a morphism in the opposite
category Symop instead.
As desired, we can view both closed subsets and open subsets in this common framework, and
the interactions between them are as expected from naive considerations:
Lemma6.4.LetC‚ààSym.
(1) There is a fully faithful finite-limit-preserving functor from the poset of closed subsets of
S(C)to(Sym op)/C, sending the closed subsetZto the localization
i‚àó
Z :C‚ÜíMod A(C),
whereAis the corresponding idempotent algebra.
(2) There is a fully faithful finite-limit-preserving functor from the poset of open subsets of
S(C)to(Sym op)/C, sending the open subsetUto the localization
j‚àó
U :C‚ÜíC/Mod A(C)
whereAis the idempotent algebra corresponding toU c.
(3) LetZbe a closed subset ofS(C)andUan open subset ofS(C). Then
i‚àó
Z factors throughj ‚àó
U ‚áîZ c ‚à™U=S(C),i.e.‚ÄúZ‚äÇU ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤.
and
j‚àó
U factors throughi ‚àó
Z ‚áîZ c ‚à©U=‚àÖ,i.e.‚ÄúU‚äÇZ ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤.
(4) LetZbe a closed subset ofS(C)with corresponding idempotent algebraA, and letf ‚àó :
C‚ÜíDbe a map inSym. Then the pushout ofi ‚àó
Z alongf ‚àó exists inSymand is given
byi ‚àó
Z‚Ä≤ whereZ ‚Ä≤ corresponds to the idempotent algebraf ‚àóAinD. Similarly, ifUis the
complement ofZ, then the pushout ofj ‚àó
U alongf ‚àó exists and is given byj ‚àó
U ‚Ä≤ whereU ‚Ä≤ is
the complement ofZ ‚Ä≤.
Proof.These claims are all straightforward. For (1), sincei ‚àó
Z is a localization,i Z is a monomor-
phism in (Sym op)/C, hence the full subcategory of (Sym op)/C spanned by all thesei Z is indeed
equivalent to a poset. Then the well-definedness and full faithfulness of the functor amounts to the
assertion that
ModA(C)‚äÇMod A‚Ä≤(C)‚áîZ‚äÇZ ‚Ä≤(‚áîA=A ‚Ä≤ ‚äóA),
whereAcorresponds toZandA ‚Ä≤ toZ ‚Ä≤, and this is simple. The functor in (2) is well-defined and
fully faithful for the exact same reason.
7In the lecture, we restricted to a more minimalist context of ‚Äúimmersions‚Äù, but it seems this restriction is
actually irrelevant and distracting, so we take the maximalist approach here. In hindsight, one can say that the
discussion of this lecture was initiating the path towards the theory of Gestalten developed later with Stefanich,
[Sch26].
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 63
The claim about finite limits in (1) and (2) is a simple consequence of the base-change result
(4), as is the claim in (3). Finally, the base-change result (4) follows from the description of the
kernel ofi ‚àó
Z (resp.j ‚àó
U) as the tensor ideal generated by [1‚ÜíA] (resp.A).‚ñ°
A map in Sym op isomorphic to one of the formi Z as in (1) will be called aclosed immersion,
and a map in Sym op isomorphic to one of the formj U as in (2) will be called anopen immersion.
Thus we have seen that the poset of open immersions into a fixedCidentifies with the poset of open
subsets ofS(C), and the poset of closed immersions intoCidentifies with the poset of closed subsets
ofS(C). Also, closed and open subsets interact ‚Äúas expected‚Äù in the larger poset of subobjects of
Cin Sym op. Moreover, both open and closed immersions are closed under base-change, and these
base-changes are calculated in the naive way in terms of corresponding algebras.
There is the following abstract characterization of open and closed immersions.
Proposition6.5.Letf ‚àó :C‚ÜíDinSym. Then:
(1)fis a closed immersion if and only iff ‚àó has a fully faithful right adjointf ‚àó which preserves
colimits and satisfies the projection formula
c‚äóf ‚àód ‚àº‚Üíf ‚àó(f ‚àóc‚äód).
(2)fis an open immersion if and only iff ‚àó has a fully faithful left adjointf ‚ôÆ which preserves
colimits (this is of course automatic for a left adjoint) and satisfies the projection formula
f‚ôÆ(d‚äóf ‚àóc) ‚àº‚Üíc‚äóf ‚ôÆd.
Moreover, in each of these cases the specified adjoint commutes with arbitrary base-change.
Proof.For (1), iffis a closed immersion corresponding to an idempotent algebraA, then
we have thatf ‚àó is the forgetful functor Mod A(C)‚ÜíC, and the required properties are clear.
Conversely, iff ‚àó has a colimit-preserving right adjointf ‚àó satisfying the projection formula, then
first of all we have that 1‚Üíf ‚àó1 makesf ‚àó1 into an idempotent algebra, by the projection formula
applied toc=f ‚àó1 andd= 1. Then to identifyf ‚àó with the closed immersion corresponding tof ‚àó1,
as both are localizations it suffices to see
f‚àóD= Mod f‚àó1(C).
as full subcategories ofC. The inclusion‚äÇis formal fromf ‚àó being right adjoint to the symmetric
monoidalf ‚àó. For‚äÉ, note thatX‚äóf ‚àó1 =f ‚àóf ‚àóXby the projection formula.
For (2), iffis an open immersion corresponding to an idempotent algebraA, then we can
identifyDwith the full subcategory ofCconsisting of thoseXwithX‚äóA= 0, and in these
termsf ‚àó becomes‚àí ‚äó[1‚ÜíA] andf ‚ôÆ becomes the inclusion. Then the projection formula is clear.
Conversely, supposef ‚àó has the left adjointf ‚ôÆ satisfying projection formula. LetAbe the cofiber
off ‚ôÆ1‚Üí1. ThenAis an idempotent algebra by the projection formula, and we need to see that
ker(f ‚àó) = ModA(C).
as full subcategories ofC. CertainlyA, and hence Mod A(C), is in the kernel becausef ‚àóf‚ôÆ1 = 1
by fully faithfulness off ‚ôÆ. Conversely, ifX‚ààker(f ‚àó), thenX‚äóf ‚ôÆ1 = 0 by the projection formula,
whenceX‚ààMod A(C).
Finally, the commutation with base-change follows from (4) in the previous lemma and the
explicit description ofi ‚àói‚àó =‚àí ‚äóAandj ‚ôÆj‚àó =‚àí ‚äó[1‚ÜíA].‚ñ°
Next, we deduce the expected permanence properties related to composition.
64 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Corollary6.6.InSym op, we have the following.
(1) A composition of closed immersions is a closed immersion, and a composition of open
immersions is an open immersion.
(2) Letf ‚àó :C‚ÜíDandg ‚àó :D‚ÜíD ‚Ä≤ be composable maps such thatfis a monomorphism
(which holds if it is either a closed or an open immersion). Iff‚ó¶gis an open immersion,
thengis an open immersion, and iff‚ó¶gis a closed immersion, thengis a closed
immersion.
Proof.The claim in (1) follows from the characterization in terms of the projection formula.
The claim in (2) follows immediately from base-change stability of open and closed immersions.‚ñ°
From these properties it follows for example that ifj ‚àó
U :C‚ÜíDis the pullback functor
corresponding to an open subsetU‚äÇ S(C), thenS(D) identifies with the locale of open subsets of
U: a nice sanity check.
Furthermore we get the following, letting us formalize descent with respect to not-necessarily-
open covers:
Theorem6.7.(1) There is a Grothendieck topology onSym op where the covering sieves
over a givenCare those which contain some set of open immersions whose corresponding
open subsets coverS(C).
(2) The identity functor(Sym op)op ‚ÜíSymis a sheaf with respect to this Grothendieck topology.
(3) The poset of open immersions also satisfies descent with respect to this Grothendieck topol-
ogy; same for the poset of closed immersions.
Proof.Part (1) follows immediately from the compatibility under composition and base-
change properties discussed above. Part (2) then follows from the descent on the locale proved
in the previous lecture. Part (3) follows formally from part (2) and the description of base-changes
of open and closed immersions in terms of idempotent algebras.‚ñ°
This concludes our detour into abstract nonsense. Now we turn to the proof of Theorem 6.1,
which now almost writes itself: note that forr ‚Ä≤ < r, we have
D(z, r‚Ä≤)‚äÇ D(z, r‚Ä≤)‚äÇD(z, r),
so the D(z, r‚Ä≤) forr ‚Ä≤ < rgive a collection of closed immersions intoD(z, r) which is refined by the
cover by the open immersionsD(z, r ‚Ä≤). Thus we can calculateC(D(z, r)) by descent, getting
C(D(z, r)) = lim‚Üê ‚àír‚Ä≤<r
ModO(D(z,r ‚Ä≤))(D(Liqp(C))),
whereO( D(z, r‚Ä≤)) is the idempotent algebra in liquidR-modules which corresponds to the given
closed subset D(z, r‚Ä≤) =Tn
i=1{|Xi ‚àíz i| ‚â§r ‚Ä≤
i}. WhenR=C[X 1, . . . , Xn], a straightforward tensor
product calculation as in the previous lecture gives that
O(D(z, r‚Ä≤)) =O hol(D(z, r‚Ä≤))
is indeed the usual ring of overconvergent functions on the given closed disk inC n, and we deduce
the claims of the theorem in that case. For generalR=C[X 1, . . . , Xn]/I, we get thatO( D(z, r‚Ä≤))
is given by the (derived) base-change
Ohol(D(z, r‚Ä≤))‚äó C[X1,...,Xn] R
in liquid modules. For that we have the following, which thereby finishes the proof of Theorem 6.1:
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 65
Lemma6.8.LetI‚äÇC[X 1, . . . , Xn]be an ideal with quotientR, letz= (z 1, . . . , zn)‚ààC n, and
letr= (r 1, . . . , rn)‚ààR n
>0. Then inD(Liq p), we have
Ohol(D(z, r))‚äó C[X1,...,Xn] R=O hol(D(z, r))/I,
meaning the derived liquid tensor product on the left is concentrated in degree zero and given by the
naive modding out on the right, which is the cokernel of the map
Ohol(D(z, r))‚äïm ‚Üí O hol(D(z, r))
given bymchosen generators ofI.
Similarly,
Ohol(D(z, r))‚äó C[X1,...,Xn] R=O hol(D(z, r))/I,
and this is also equal tolim‚Üê ‚àír‚Ä≤<r Ohol(D(z, r‚Ä≤))/I.
Proof.We claim that the condensed ringO hol(D(z, r)) is flat as a module over thediscrete
ringC[X 1, . . . , Xn](‚àó), i.e. for any discrete moduleMoverC[X 1, . . . , Xn](‚àó) the derived tensor
product
Ohol(D(z, r))‚äó C[X1,...,Xn](‚àó) M
is concentrated in degree zero. 8 We will include the argument later when we discuss the finiteness
properties of such rings.
For the remainder of the claims, note that sinceC[X 1, . . . , Xn](‚àó) is a regular noetherian ring,
a finitely generated module such asRhas a finite resolution by finite free modules, so the derived
tensor product commutes with arbitrary (derived) limits, where in this setting ‚Äúderived‚Äù is optional
due to Mittag-Leffler.‚ñ°
Our next topic is globalization and GAGA. To recap, for any finite typeC-algebraR, we have
assigned the open subset
S(R, R)‚äÇ S(R),
with corresponding localization functor in Sym
C(R)‚ÜíC(R, R).
The sourceC(R) is the purely algebraic category ofR-modules in derived liquid vector spaces,
while, as we have seen, the target is analytic: it localizes on the topological space Spec(R)(C) and
is simply described in terms of usual rings of convergent power series on disks.
Now, both assignmentsR7‚ÜíC(R) andR7‚ÜíC(R, R) form sheaves with respect to the Zariski
topology on finite typeC-schemes (we will review an argument for this argument shortly). Hence
they globalize by descent to assignments
X7‚ÜíC(X), C(X, X)
for arbitrary finite typeC-schemesX. Naturally, the comparison functor also globalizes to a map
in Sym
f ‚àó :C(X)‚ÜíC(X, X).
Then we have the following result.
8However, beware that the map of liquid ringsC[X 1, . . . , Xn]‚Üí O hol(D(z, r)) isnotflat! Indeed, if D‚Ä≤ is a closed
polydisk disjoint from D, thenC[X 1, . . . , Xn]‚Üí O hol(D‚Ä≤(z, r)) is an injection which base changes to the non-injective
mapO hol(D(z, r))‚Üí0.
66 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Theorem6.9.SupposeXis a finite typeC-scheme and consider the above algebraic-to-analytic
comparison functor
f ‚àó :C(X)‚ÜíC(X, X).
IfXis proper, thenfis an isomorphism.
As first sight, this seems a bit shocking: usually GAGA only holds for categories of coherent
sheaves, but here we‚Äôre saying it holds for these rather huge categories of (what amount to)qua-
sicoherentliquid sheaves. But in fact, the notion of quasi-coherent sheaf in analytic geometry has
been somewhat missing until now. Moreover it takes some extra work, which we‚Äôll do, to identify
the usual categories of coherent sheaves inside our big categories of quasi-coherent sheaves so as to
see that the above theorem does imply the classical GAGA.
We will prove this theorem in a more general axiomatic framework. Suppose given the following
data:
(1) A commutative ringk. (In our example,k=C)
(2) Ak-linear objectCof Sym, i.e. a map in Sym of the formD(k)‚ÜíC. (In our example,
C=D(Liq p(C)).)
(3) An open subsetU‚äÇ S(Mod k[T] (C)) (in our example,U= S
r{|T|< r}.)
This gives rise to the following notation: for anyk-algebraRand anyf‚ààR, let
S(R, f)‚äÇ S(R) :=S(Mod R(C))
denote the preimage ofUunder the mapk[T]‚ÜíRsendingTtof; this is the ‚Äúsubset ofS(R) on
whichfis analytic‚Äù.
We impose the following axioms:
(1) For anyf‚ààk, we haveS(k, f) =S(k), i.e. ‚Äúconstants are analytic‚Äù.
(2) For anyRfinite type overkandf, g‚ààR, we have
S(R, f)‚à© S(R, g)‚äÇ S(R, f g),S(R, f+g),
i.e. ‚Äúthe sum and product of analytic functions are analytic‚Äù.
(3) For anyRfinite type overkandf‚ààR, the open subset
S(R[1/f],1/f)‚äÇ S(R[1/f])
is even open inS(R), meaning this composition of an open immersion and closed immersion
happens to also be an open immersion. Denote this open subset ofS(R) byD an(f); it
corresponds to ‚Äúinvertingfin the analytic sense‚Äù.
(4) For anyRfinite type overkandf‚ààR, we have
S(R) =S(R, f)‚à™D an(f).
(5) For anyRfinite type overkandf, g‚ààR, we have
Dan(f+g)‚äÇD an(f)‚à™D an(g).
Given this data and axioms, forRfinite type overkwe can define
S(R, R)‚äÇ S(R)
as the intersection of theS(R, x i) for any finite generating setx i; by axiom (2) above this is
independent of the generating set, andS(R, R) is contained inS(R, f) for allf‚ààR. We useC(‚àí)
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 67
to denote the canonical sheaf of categories onS(R). Then we have the following abstract GAGA
theorem:
Theorem6.10.Both assignments
R7‚ÜíC(R), C(R, R)
satisfy descent for the Zariski topology, hence they globalize by descent to assignments
X7‚ÜíC(X), C(X, X)
for arbitrary finite typek-schemesX. For the induced comparison functor
f ‚àó :C(X)‚ÜíC(X, X),
we have thatfis an isomorphism ifXis proper.
Before proving this, let‚Äôs make sure it applies in our given example situation. Axiom (1), that
constants are analytic, follows from the previous lecture, as does axiom (2), using the triangle
inequality and multiplicativity. For axiom (3), by base change it suffices to considerT‚ààC[T], and
then we claim that the desired open subsetD an(T) is given by
Dan(T) =
[
r
{|T|> r}.
Indeed, the corresponding idempotent algebra is the ring of germs of holomorphic functions at 0;
everyT-torsionC[T]-module is a module over this ring, soTis inverted in the structure sheaf
on this open subset S
r{|T|> r}, hence we can also view this as an open inS(C[T, T ‚àí1]). But
essentially by definition, whenTis inverted the subset{|T|> r}is the same as{|T ‚àí1|< r ‚àí1}, and
when we take the union overrwe exactly getS(C[T, T ‚àí1], T ‚àí1) as desired. For axiom (4), we can
again consider justT‚ààC[T], and then we need to see that
[
r
{|T|< r} ‚à™
[
r
{|T|> r}=S(C[T]).
But already{|T|<2} ‚à™ {|T|>1}=S(C[T]) by the calculations in the previous lecture. Finally,
axiom (5) follows from the triangle inquality, e.g.
{|f+g|> r} ‚äÇ {|f|> r/2} ‚à™ {|g|> r/2},
and taking the union overrgives the claim.
Having verified that the axiomatics hold in our given situation, let‚Äôs turn to the proof of the
abstract GAGA theorem. We start with the following simple lemma, which is essentially the affine
case of GAGA:
Lemma6.11.LetRbe ak-algebra andf, c 0, . . . cn‚àí1 ‚ààRsuch that
f n +c n‚àí1f n‚àí1 +. . .+c 0 = 0.
Then \
i
S(R, ci)‚äÇ S(R, f),
i.e. ‚Äúiffsatisfies a monic polynomial with analytic coefficients, thenfis analytic‚Äù.
68 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Proof.By axiom (4), to provefis analytic, it suffices to show thatfis analytic once we
analytically invertf. But
f=‚àíc n‚àí1 ‚àí. . .‚àíc 0f ‚àín+1,
so this follows from axiom (2).‚ñ°
It follows from this (and axioms (1) and (2)) that we have a well-defined open subset
S(R, R+)‚äÇ S(R)
wheneverR + ‚äÇRis the integral closure of a finitely generatedk-subalgebra ofR. Using this,
we can plug into the formalism ofdiscrete Huber pairs, which we briefly review here, though see
[Sch19, Lecture IX] for more background.
To any pair (R, R+) of a commutative ringRand integrally closed subringR +, Huber assigns
the set Spa(R, R+) defined as
{v:R‚ÜíŒì‚à™ {+‚àû} |v(f g) =v(f) +v(g), v(f+g)‚â•min{v(f), v(g)}, v(0) = +‚àû, v(R +)‚â•0}/‚àº,
the set of equivalence classes of valuations onRwhich are non-negative onR +. Here Œì is a totally
ordered abelian group. Given such a valuation, the set off‚ààRwithv(f) = +‚àûis always a prime
ideal, and in fact Spa(R, R +) is an enlargement of the usual spectrum of the ringR: besides the
prime ideal, we also get an induced valuation on the residue field, giving a corresponding subring
of elements‚â•0 and maximal ideal of elements>0. In terms of intuition, one can think of such
a valuationvas measuring some kind of ‚Äúorder of vanishing/pole‚Äù of a function at some fictional
point.
Moreover, the set Spa(R, R +) has the structure of a spectral topological space, with basis of
quasi-compact opens given by therational open subsets
U( g1, . . . , gn
f ) ={v|v(f)Ã∏= +‚àû, v(g i)‚â•v(f)‚àÄi}.
These subsets are parametrized by arbitrary elementsf, g 1, . . . gn ofR. Different choices of these
elements can give rise to the sameU( g1,...,gn
f ); however, the discrete Huber pair
(R[1/f], ^R+[g1/f, . . . , gn/f]),
where the tilde denotes integral closure,iscanonically determined by the rational open subset
U( g1,...,gn
f ); and conversely
U( g1, . . . , gn
f ) = Spa(R[1/f], ^R+[g1/f, . . . , gn/f]),
showing that the rational open is likewise determined by the corresponding discrete Huber pair.
More precisely, the poset of rational open subsets of Spa(R, R+) is canonically equivalent to the
opposite of the category offinitary localizationsof (R, R +), meaning those maps discrete Huber
pairs
(R, R+)‚Üí(S, S +)
under (R, R +) for whichSis a finitary localization ofRandS + is generated, as an integrally
closed subring ofScontainingR +, by finitely many elements. Moreover, this equivalence of posets
preserves finite intersections.
We can therefore transfer the Grothendieck topology on the poset of basic quasi-compact open
subsets of Spa(R, R +) over to this category of finitary localizations of (R, R +). By definition, a
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 69
covering is a collection of maps which is surjective on Spa(‚àí,‚àí). However, there is also the following
finitary algebraic description:
Lemma6.12.Let(R, R +)be a discrete Huber pair. Then the Grothendieck topology on the
opposite category of finitary localizations of(R, R +)is generated by covers of the following type:
(1) For(S, S +)a finitary localization of(R, R +)andf‚ààB, the maps
(S, S+)‚Üí(S, ^S+[f])
and
(S, S+)‚Üí(S[1/f], ^S+[1/f])
form a cover of(S, S +).
(2) For(S, S +)a finitary localization of(R, R +)andf 1, . . . , fn ‚ààSwithf 1 +. . .+f n = 1,
the maps
{(S, S+)‚Üí(S[1/f i], ^S+[1/fi])}i‚ààI
form a cover of(S, S +).
Proof.First note that each of these are covers. For (1), this is because of the tautology that
for any valuationvwe either havev(f)‚â•0 orv(f)<0 (in which casevextends to a valuation on
R[1/f] withv(1/f)‚â•0, indeed<0). For (2), for any valuationvwe must havev(f i)‚â§0 for some
iby the ultrametric triangle inquality and the factv(1) = 0; then the valuation extends toR[1/f i]
withv(1/f i)‚â•0.
For the converse, first recall (see [Sch19, Lecture X] for the argument) that the Grothendieck
topology is generated by the covers in (1) together with the algebraic Zariski covers, i.e. those of
the following type: for (S, S +) a finitary localization of (R;R +) andf 1, . . . , fn ‚ààSgenerating the
unit ideal, take the cover
{(S, S+)‚Üí(S[1/f i],fS+)}i‚ààI .
Thus it suffices to see that any such algebraic Zariski cover is refined by a cover as in (2). However,
we getg i such thatf 1g1 +. . . f ngn = 1; then replacingf i byf igi we see that the cover (2) provides
a refinement. ‚ñ°
By this lemma, given a presheaf on the opposite category of finitary localizations of (R, R +)
which satisfies descent with respect to (1) and (2), we get a unique sheaf on the topological space
Spa(R, R+) whose value on a rational open is given by the value of our original presheaf on the
corresponding finitary localization.
Now we apply this in our axiomatic GAGA situation. Let (R, R +) be a discrete Huber pair
which is of finite type over (k, k), i.e.Ris a finite typek-algebra andR + is generated, as an
integrally closedk-subalgebra ofR, by finitely many elements. To this data we can naturally
assign the object
C(R, R+)‚ààSym,
which, we recall, is the the localization ofC(R) = Mod R(C) corresponding to the open subset
S(R, R+)‚äÇ S(R). Given a finitary localization
(R, R+)‚Üí(S, S +),
we have the induced map in Sym
f ‚àó :C(R, R +)‚ÜíC(S, S +).
70 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Thenfis a monomorphism in Sym op, being the composition of an open inclusion (forcing the finitely
many generating elements ofS + to be analytic) and a closed inclusion (algebraically inverting some
f‚ààRto go fromRtoS). Moreover this functor from the opposite category of finitary localizations
of (R, R+) to subobjects ofC(R, R +) in Symop preserves finite intersections, by the same reasoning
and base-change properties for open and closed immersions. Finally arrive at the crucial:
Proposition6.13.Suppose we are in the axiomatic GAGA set-up. Then the functor
(R, R+)7‚ÜíC(R, R +)
from finite type discrete Huber pairs over(k, k)toSymgives a morphism of sites from the Huber
topology on finitary localizations to the topology of open covers inSym op described earlier in the
lecture.
Proof.We have already seen that the functor preserves pullbacks, so it suffices to see that it
sends our generating covers (1), (2) in Lemma 6.12 to open covers in Sym op. For the first type (1)
of generating covers, this is exactly axiom (4) in our set-up. For the second type, it follows from
axiom (5) together with the equalityD an(1) =S(R) which follows from the definitions and axiom
(1). ‚ñ°
Corollary6.14.For each discrete Huber pair(R, R +)of finite type over(k, k), there is a
unique sheafC(‚àí)onSpa(R, R +)with values inSymwhose value on the basic quasicompact open
U( g1,...,gn
f )is given by
C

U( g1, . . . , gn
f )

=C(R[1/f], R +[g1/f, . . . gn/f]).
Now we are almost done with the proof of GAGA. Both assignments
R7‚ÜíSpa(R, k)
and
R7‚ÜíSpa(R, R)
glue with respect to the Zariski topology; indeed it is elementary to check in both cases that Zariski
covers ofRgo to covers of rational open subsets. Thus these assignments globalize to
X7‚ÜíSpa(X, k)
and
X7‚ÜíSpa(X, X)
for any finite typek-schemeX, hence likewise the sheafC(‚àí) in the corollary uniquely extends to
these global constructions by descent. Moreover, the natural open inclusion Spa(R, R)‚äÇSpa(R, k)
glues to a map
Spa(X, X)‚ÜíSpa(X, k)
of topological spaces, and the sheaf of categories on Spa(X, X) is the pullback of categories on
Spa(X, k). The map of topological spaces is by construction locally an open inclusion on the
source, but the valuative criterion for properness exactly says that it is a bijection on underlying
sets whenXis proper. Thus we deduce that it is a homeomorphism whenXis proper. This proves
the abstract GAGA theorem.
6. LECTURE VI: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA 71
Exercise 1.Show that for any open subsetU‚äÇC n, the categoryC(U) can be described
in terms of the structure sheaf (of liquid rings)O(‚àí) onC n as follows:C(U) identifies with the
full subcategory ofO-module sheaves (in derived liquidC-vector spaces) consisting of thoseMfor
which
M(D)‚äó O(D) O|D
‚àº‚Üí M| D
for every open polydiskD‚äÇU, i.e. in some senseC(C n) is the category ofquasicoherentliquid
sheaves on the analytic spaceC n.
Exercise 2.Show that in fact the quasicoherence condition in Exercise 1 is automatic, i.e. it
holds for any sheaf ofO-modules inD(Liq p(C)). More generally, ifXis locally compact Hausdorff
andC‚ààSym with a mapS(C)‚ÜíX, inducing (by pushforward) a structure sheafO C onX, any
sheaf ofO C-modules onXis quasicoherent, and their category is equivalent toC. (Hint: Given
any sheafMofO C-modules onX, we want to see thatM(X)‚äó C OC ‚Üí Mis an isomorphism. It
suffices to check after evaluating on compact subsetsZ‚äÇX(i.e., the filtered colimit of sections on
open neighborhoodsU n ‚äÇXofZ). Now for compacti:Z‚äÇXwith open complementj:U‚ÜíX,
use the trianglej !j‚àóM ‚Üí M ‚Üíi ‚àói‚àóMto reduce the question toi ‚àói‚àóMorj !j‚àóM. Fori ‚àói‚àóM, the
claim follows from idempotence ofO C(Z), as Œì(X, i ‚àói‚àóM) = Œì(Z, i ‚àóM) is a module overO C(Z).
Forj !j‚àóM, write this further as a colimit ofi n‚àói!
nMfor closed subsetsZ n ‚äÇUexhaustingU, and
then use that Œì(X, i n‚àói!
nM) = Œì(Zn, i!
nM) is a module overO C(Zn), andO C(Zn)‚äó C OC(Z) = 0
asZ n ‚à©Z=‚àÖ ‚àà S(C).)
Exercise 3.Show that iffis a closed immersion andgis an open immersion, thenf‚ó¶gcan
be rewritten asg ‚Ä≤ ‚ó¶f ‚Ä≤ whereg ‚Ä≤ is an open immersion andf ‚Ä≤ is a closed immersion.
Exercise 4.Explicitly prove GAGA forP n
C by refining a Zariski cover by an analytic cover.
72 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
7. Lecture VII: Analytification and GAGA, redux
As a lot happened in the last two lectures, let us reorganize the material using the following
(insanely general, but still useful) definition, a bit analogous to the notion of a ringed space.
Definition7.1.Acategorified localeis a pair (X, C) consisting of a localeXand a cocomplete
closed symmetric monoidal stable‚àû-categoryCwith a mapf:S(C)‚ÜíX.
In particular, this gives rise to a sheaf of (cocomplete closed symmetric monoidal stable)‚àû-
categories onX, taking anyUtoC(U) :=C(f ‚àí1(U)). In particular, looking at the endomorphisms
of the unit object, one gets a sheaf ofE ‚àû-algebras onX, that one may call the structure sheaf.
In the last lecture, several different functors from finite typeC-algebrasRto categorified locales
were defined. In all cases, these sentR=Cto (‚àó,D(Liq p(C))), and so in general one gets categorified
locales over (‚àó,D(Liq p(C))).
Recall that to anyRwe can associate the derived‚àû-categoryD(Liq p(R)) = Mod R(D(Liqp))
ofp-liquidR-modules. InsideS(R) :=S(D(Liq p(R))), we defined open subsets{|f|< r}and
{|f|> r}for anyf‚ààRandr >0. In particular, for anyf‚ààR, we can consider the open subset
S(R, f) ={|f|<‚àû}=
[
r>0
{|f|< r} ‚äÇ S(R),
and then set
S(R, R) =
\
f‚ààR
{|f|<‚àû} ‚äÇ S(R).
As it is enough to take the intersection over a set of algebra generators, this is in fact an open
subset ofS(R). Then the arguments from Lecture V defined a natural continuous map
S(R, R)‚Üí M Berk(R) = Spec(R)(C)
to the classical points of Spec(R) (with their complex topology), so that the loci{|f|< r}and
{|f|> r}are obtained as preimages of the evident loci in Spec(R)(C).
This construction glues for the Zariski topology, so for any schemeXlocally of finite type over
C, one can define a categorified locale
(X(C), C an(X))
which we refer to the as the analytification ofX. (In fact, we will later identify the usual category
of complex-analytic spaces as a full subcategory of categorified locales over (‚àó,D(Liq p(C))), and
under this identification, this corresponds to the usual complex-analytic space associated toX.
Most of the work here was done in the last lecture, whereC an(X) was described explicitly.)
One main goal of the last lecture was to give a proof of GAGA. This was in fact understood
not merely as an identification of the category of coherent sheaves, but of all ofC an(X), in caseX
is proper.
Namely, one can also pass to a very algebraic ‚Äúcategorified locale‚Äù. To anyR, we associate all
ofD(Liq p(R)), and we only use the map
S(R)‚ÜíSpec(R) op
coming from the usual Zariski localizations (which define idempotent algebras, and thus closed
subsets ofS(R)). One has to be slightly careful, as now Zariski localizations give closed embeddings,
7. LECTURE VII: ANALYTIFICATION AND GAGA, REDUX 73
but one can still glue (finitely many) categorified locales along closed subsets. In particular, ifX
is separated and of finite type overC, one can define a categorified locale
(X, Calg(X)).
This construction did not use any of the ‚Äútopology‚Äù ofC. In fact, it could have been carried not
with liquidC-vector spaces, but with all condensedC-vector spaces; the current version would then
simply be a base change to the liquid situation.
Now the GAGA theorem admits the following formulation.
Theorem7.2.For properX, there is a natural equivalence of (cocomplete closed symmetric
monoidalD(Liq p(C))-linear stable)‚àû-categories
Can(X) ‚àº= Calg(X).
In fact, the proof will proceed by comparing them as categorified locales; but for this,C alg(X)
first needs a finer ‚Äústructural map‚Äù:
Theorem7.3.For a finite typeC-algebraR, there is a natural map of locales
S(R)‚ÜíSpa(R,C) ‚Ä≤.
Here,Spa(R,C) ‚Ä≤ is the set of valuations| ¬∑ |:R‚ÜíŒì‚à™ {0}with values in some totally ordered
abelian groupŒì(satisfying|f g|=|f||g|,|f+g| ‚â§max(|f|,|g|),|0|= 0,|C √ó|= 1). We denote
the inequalities inŒìby the symbol‚â™, andSpa(R,C) ‚Ä≤ is given the topology for which the subsets
{|f| ‚â™ |g|}form a generating family of closed subsets. The preimage of{|g| Ã∏= 0}isS(R[ 1
g]), and
the preimage of{|f| ‚â™ |g|} ‚äÇ {|g| Ã∏= 0}is
\
r>0
{| f
g | ‚â§r} ‚äÇ S(R[ 1
g])‚äÇ S(R).
Something slightly weird was done to the topology of Spa(R,C): Usually, in adic spectra,
{|f| Ã∏= 0}and{|f| ‚â§1}define open subsets. For us, the first is closed, while the second is open.
Intuitively, the valuations considered here keep track only of ‚Äúinfinite‚Äù values of|f|. Namely,|f| ‚â§1
actually means|f|=O(1), i.e.|f|<‚àûin usual notation. This is the reason we also write|f| ‚â™ |g|
in place of|f|<|g|. 9 For the same reason, we will also write|f| ‚â§O(|g|) in place of|f| ‚â§ |g|.
In other words, this map to the adic spectrum is not keeping track of precise absolute values, but
only of asymptotics (for any pair of functions inR!). This also explains why one gets the strong
triangle inequality ‚Äì if both|f 1|,|f 2| ‚â§O(|g|), then also|f 1 +f 2| ‚â§O(|g|).
Another point worth making is that the valuations are not required to be continuous in any way
‚Äì we treatRas a discreteC-algebra in the above definition of Spa(R,C). In fact, we ask|C √ó|= 1
while|0|= 0.
Proof.The proof is similar to the construction of the mapS(R, R)‚Üí M Berk(R): One can
describe the adic spectrum in terms of possible binary relations‚â™onR, subject to some simple
axioms, see [Hub93, proof of Proposition 2.2]. One then has to see that the closed subsets ofS(R)
we assigned by hand to{|f| ‚â™ |g|}satisfy the correct intersection properties:
(1){|0| ‚â™ |1|}is everything;
9Beware however of a trap: While this reads well in the direction|f|is much smaller than|g|, which is always
true whenf= 0, the condition 0‚â™ |g|might also be read as|g| ‚â´0, i.e.gis much larger than zero. It doesn‚Äôt mean
that, 0‚â™ |g|only means|g| Ã∏= 0.
74 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
(2){|f| ‚â™ |g|} ‚à© {|g| ‚â™ |f|}is empty;
(3){|f| ‚â™ |h|} ‚äÇ {|f| ‚â™ |g|} ‚à™ {|g| ‚â™ |h|};
(4){|f| ‚â™ |g+h|} ‚äÇ {|f| ‚â™ |g|} ‚à™ {|f| ‚â™ |h|};
(5){|f| ‚â™ |g|} ‚à© {0‚â™ |h|}={|f h| ‚â™ |gh|}.
Properties (1), (2), and (5) are straightforward. For (3), note thathis invertible on the left-hand
side, so we can assume thathis invertible, and then replacefby f
h andgby g
h to assume that
h= 1. Now we can cover the whole space by the loci{|g| ‚â•1}and{|g| ‚â§1}as defined in Lecture
V. On the first,{|f| ‚â™1}is contained in{|f| ‚â™ |g|}, while on the second{|g| ‚â™1}is everything
and hence{|f| ‚â™1} ‚äÇ {|g| ‚â™1}. It remains to prove (4). On its left-hand side,g+his invertible,
so we can assumeg+his invertible; dividing by it, we can assumeg+h= 1. Then the whole
space is covered by the loci{|g| ‚â• 1
2 }and{|h| ‚â• 1
2 }by the arguments from Lecture V. On the first,
{|f| ‚â™1} ‚äÇ {|f| ‚â™ |g|}, and on the second{|f| ‚â™1} ‚äÇ {|f| ‚â™ |h|}.‚ñ°
There is a natural map from Spa(R,C) ‚Ä≤ to Spec(R)op. Namely, there is a map
Spa(R,C) ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíSpec(R) op
such that the preimage of{fÃ∏= 0}is{|f| Ã∏= 0}. In particular, the categorified locale
(Spec(R)op, Calg(R))
naturally refines to a categorified locale
(Spa(R,C) ‚Ä≤, Calg(R)).
One can also glue this construction: for any separated finite typeC-schemeX, one can glue
Spa(R,C) ‚Ä≤ to a spaceX ad‚Ä≤/C; beware again that the gluing happens along closed subsets. This
gives a categorified locale
(Xad‚Ä≤/C, Calg(X))
refining (X, Calg(X)).
On the other hand, recall that for any integrally closed subalgebraR + ‚äÇR, one defines
Spa(R, R+)‚Ä≤ ‚äÇSpa(R,C) ‚Ä≤
as the open subset where|f| ‚â§O(1) for allf‚ààR +. (It is enough to demand this condition
for a finite subset ofR +, generating it as an integrally closed subalgebra ofR.) Recall also that
{|f| ‚â§O(1)}translates inS(R) into the condition{|f|<‚àû}, so we find that
S(R, R)‚äÇ S(R)
is the preimage of
Spa(R, R)‚Ä≤ ‚äÇSpa(R,C) ‚Ä≤.
In particular, there is an open immersion of categorified locales
(Spa(R, R)‚Ä≤, Can(A))‚äÇ(Spa(R,C) ‚Ä≤, Calg(A)).
Now we glue this information. Gluing now along open subsets, one gets another adic spaceX ad
associated toX, glued from Spa(R, R)‚Äôs. IfXis separated finite type, there is a natural open
immersionX ad ,‚ÜíX ad‚Ä≤/C glued from the similar open immersions on affine pieces. Moreover, the
valuative criterion of properness says thatXis proper if and only if this map is bijective, i.e. a
8. LECTURE VIII: NUCLEAR MODULES 75
homeomorphism. In other words, for any separatedX, we get an open immersion of categorified
locales
(Xad, Can(X))‚äÇ(X ad‚Ä≤/C, Calg(X)).
IfXis proper, the two spaces are the same, and thus the categories are the same, giving Theo-
rem 7.2.
In fact, there is probably one small addition one should make, about howC an(X) is glued. In
the previous step, we glued it onX ad, while previously we glued it onX(C). What is the relation?
There is a natural continuous map
Spec(R)(C)‚ÜíSpec(R),
where the target is equipped with the Zariski topology, and there is also a natural continuous map
Spa(R, R)‚ÜíSpec(R),
where the preimage of{fÃ∏= 0}is{|f| ‚â•O(1)}(which translates to S
r>0{|f|> r}inS(R, R)).
Over these comparison maps, one gets maps of categorified locales
(Spec(R)(C), Can(R))‚Üí(Spec(R), C an(R))‚Üê(Spa(R, R), C an(R))
which glues to comparison maps
(X(C), C an(X))‚Üí(X, C an(X))‚Üê(X ad, Can(X)).
In other words, to glueC an(X), Zariski covers suffice, and then one can refine the localizations
either toX(C) or toX ad.
What is striking about this proof of GAGA is its formality ‚Äì the key is to construct the map to
the adic spectrum, which reduces to some formal calculations with idempotent algebras. Once one
has that, general nonsense reduces this version of GAGA to the purely valuation-theoretic assertion
that the mapX ad ‚ÜíX ad‚Ä≤/C is a bijection.
We also note thatS(A) has the striking property that it is globally algebraic ‚Äì the global
functions are preciselyR‚Äì while it is locally analytic ‚Äì the functions on the open subsetS(R, R)
are analytic functions. Using the map
S(R)‚ÜíSpa(R,C) ‚Ä≤
one can also localize near the ‚Äúboundary‚Äù ofS(R) using specific growth conditions on functions.
This makes it possible to construct algebraic functions, or also coherent sheaves etc., by gluing
them after such ‚Äúanalytic‚Äù localizations. This is somewhat reminiscent of the ‚Äúaffine GAGA‚Äù of
Bakker‚ÄìBrunebarbe‚ÄìTsimerman [BBT18], built on o-minimal techniques.
8. Lecture VIII: Nuclear modules
In the previous lectures, we proved a GAGA theorem of the following type: ifXis a proper
C-scheme, then two a priori different‚àû-categories of ‚Äúp-liquid derived quasicoherent sheaves‚Äù on
Xactually agree. The first is Zariski-glued from the categories
C(R) = Mod R(D(Liqp))
of derivedR-modules inp-liquid vector spaces, while the second is Zariski-glued from the analytic
localizations of these,
C(R, R),
which localize on the underlying topological space Spec(R)(C) and therefore also Zariski-glue.
76 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
The usual GAGA theorem is a similar comparison theorem, but for coherent sheaves instead.
The above categories of quasi-coherent sheaves are much bigger than the categories of coherent
sheaves: first of all, there‚Äôs no finiteness condition on theR-modules in definition ofC(R), and
second of all, our base category is Liq p and not the usual algebraic category ofC-vector spaces. In
this lecture we want to work towards explaining how to recover the usual categories of coherent
sheaves inside these larger categories, so as to deduce the usual GAGA from the one we have just
proved.
The general mechanism for this fits into the familiar ansatz that ‚Äúfinite = compact + discrete‚Äù:
we will recover the category of coherent sheaves as the intersection of two different full subcategories
of our large categories, one which corresponds to a kind of compactness condition and the other
to a kind of discreteness condition. In this lecture, we talk about the appropriate discreteness
condition.
The first thing to emphasize is that there is a naive notion of discreteness forp-liquid vector
spaces. Indeed, the forgetful functor
Liqp ‚ÜíMod C,
X7‚ÜíX(‚àó),
admits an exact fully faithful left adjointM7‚ÜíM Œ¥ :=M‚äó C(‚àó) C; more concretely, ifMis a direct
sum of copies ofCin the category of abstract vector spaces, thenM Œ¥ is the ‚Äúsame‚Äù direct sum of
copies of the objectCin the category ofp-liquid spaces. (Note however thatM Œ¥ is not discrete as
an underlying condensed set; it is only discrete ‚Äúrelative toC‚Äù).
We can call ap-liquid vector space ‚Äúdiscrete‚Äù if it is in the essential image of this functor.
But this category of discretep-liquid vector spaces, which is equivalent to the category of abstract
C-vector spaces, is not robust enough for our purposes. The reason is that the most relevant liquid
vector spaces for us are the rings of overconvergent holomorphic functions on closed polydisks, and
those are not discrete.
But it turns out that there is an enlargement of the category of discretep-liquid vector spaces,
which contains these rings of overconvergent holomorphic functions on closed polydisks (and rings
of convergent holomoprhic functions on open polydisks), but is still constrained enough that it can
be used as a replacement for discreteness in the ansatz ‚Äúfinite = compact + discrete‚Äù. This is the
category ofnuclear moduleswhich is the subject of this lecture. 10
The definition of nuclear module is based on the notion of nuclear (or trace-class) map, which
we can give in the context of an arbitrary closed symmetric monoidal‚àû-categoryC. First, some
notation: forx, y‚ààC, we will denote by
yx
the internal hom object fromxtoy. We will also set
x‚à® := 1x
where 1 denotes the unit object ofC, and
x(‚àó) :=Hom(1, x),
the mapping anima from the unit tox.
10The notion of nuclearity is due to Grothendieck and arose from his study of tensor products of locally convex
topological vector spaces, [Gro55]. It appears for us here in a slightly different guise, but the fundamental ideas are
the same.
8. LECTURE VIII: NUCLEAR MODULES 77
Note for allx, y‚ààCthat there is a natural map
x‚à® ‚äóy‚Üíy x,
and in particular a natural map
(x‚à® ‚äóy)(‚àó)‚ÜíHom(x, y).
Definition8.1.Letf:x‚Üíybe a map inC. We say thatfistrace-classornuclearifflies
in the image of the natural map
(x‚à® ‚äóy)(‚àó)‚ÜíHom(x, y).
Note that this is aœÄ 0 condition, i.e. we are asking that the component of the anima Hom(x, y)
containingfis hit by the map from (x ‚à® ‚äóy)(‚àó). The following lemma can be proved by some
diagram chasing.
Lemma8.2.LetCbe a closed symmetric monoidal‚àû-category.
(1) Iff:x‚Üíyis trace-class andg:y‚Üíy ‚Ä≤ andh:x ‚Ä≤ ‚Üíxare arbitrary, theng‚ó¶f‚ó¶his
trace-class.
(2) Iff:x‚Üíyandf ‚Ä≤ :x ‚Ä≤ ‚Üíy ‚Ä≤ are trace-class, thenf‚äóf ‚Ä≤ :x‚äóx ‚Ä≤ ‚Üíy‚äóy ‚Ä≤ is trace-class.
(3) Iff:x‚Üíyis trace-class andc‚ààCis arbitrary, then the commutative square
c‚à® ‚äóx //

c‚à® ‚äóy

xc // yc
admits a diagonal mapx c ‚Üíc ‚à® ‚äóymaking both triangles commute.
To continue, we add some hypotheses to our closed symmetric monoidal‚àû-categoryC, namely
we require:
(1)Cis stable and compactly generated;
(2) The unit 1‚ààCis a compact object.
Recall that an objectx‚ààCis called compact if Hom(x,‚àí) :C‚ÜíAn commutes with filtered
colimits, andCiscompactly generatedif it has all colimits, and there is a collection of compact
objectsC 0 ‚äÇCsuch thatCis the smallest cocomplete full subcategory ofCcontainingC 0. We
can closeC 0 up under finite colimits, and then we even have the canonical expression
x= lim ‚àí ‚Üíc0‚ààC0,c0‚Üíx
c0
ofxas a filtered colimit of objects inC 0 for allx‚ààC, and indeedC‚âÉInd(C 0).
Remark8.3.Note that we donotrequire that the collection of compact objects be closed
under tensor product. We would love to be able to impose this very convenient hypothesis, but
unfortunately it is (probably) not satisfied in our main example ofC=D(Liq p). Indeed, an object
ofD(Liq p) is compact if and only if it can be represented by a finite complex of compact projective
objects of Liq p. As recorded in the appendix to Lecture III, the collection of compact projective
objects is not closed under tensor products; and there seems to be no reason why the tensor product
of two compact projective objects should be represented by a finite complex of compact projective
objects, either.
78 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
The main difficulty caused by this lack of closure under tensor products is the following: a
compact objectc‚ààCneed not be ‚Äúcompact in the sense of internal hom‚Äù, i.e. the functorx7‚Üíx c :
C‚ÜíCneed not commute with filtered colimits.
In the above abstract context we have the following simple lemma.
Lemma8.4.LetCbe a compactly generated closed symmetric monoidal‚àû-category with com-
pact unit object. For any trace-class mapf:x‚ÜíyinC, there is a compact objectc‚ààCand a
factoring offas
x‚Üíc‚Üíy
wherex‚Üícis also trace-class.
Proof.By definition, the mapfcomes from a class inœÄ 0((x‚à® ‚äóy)(‚àó)). As the functorx ‚à® ‚äó ‚àí
and the functor (‚àí)(‚àó) both commute with filtered colimits, andyis a filtered colimit of compact
objects, we deduce thatflifts to a class inœÄ 0((x‚à® ‚äóc)(‚àó)) for some compactcmapping toy, giving
the claim. ‚ñ°
Definition8.5.LetCbe a stable compactly generated closed symmetric monoidal‚àû-category
with compact unit object.
(1) Forx‚ààC, we say thatxisnuclearif for all compact objectsc‚ààC, the natural map
(c‚à® ‚äóx)(‚àó)‚ÜíHom(c, x)
is an isomorphism.
(2) Forx‚ààC, we say thatxisbasic nuclearit is isomorphic to the colimit of a sequence
x0 ‚Üíx 1 ‚Üí. . .
of trace-class maps between objects ofC.
Note that by replacingcby its shifts, we see that condition (1) is insensitive to whether we use
mapping spectra or mapping anima. It‚Äôs more convenient to use mapping spectra because then we
stay in the stable context, so we‚Äôll do that from now on.
Theorem8.6.LetCbe a stable compactly generated closed symmetric monoidal‚àû-category
with compact unit object. Then:
(1) The full subcategoryNucof nuclear objects inCis stable, closed under colimits, and closed
under tensor products,
(2) The stable‚àû-categoryNucis◊ê 1-compactly generated, and the◊ê 1-compact objects are
exactly the basic nuclear modules.
Proof.Stability and cocompleteness of Nuc follow from the fact that both functors (c ‚à® ‚äó
‚àí)(‚àó) and Hom(c,‚àí) (with values in spectra) commute with all colimits. For closure under tensor
products, this follows from (2), since basic nuclears are clearly closed under tensor products.
So we just need to show (2). First note that basic nuclears are nuclear: indeed, ifxis basic
nuclear given by lim‚àí ‚Üíxn as in the definition, then forc‚ààC, the two ind-systems
xc
0 ‚Üíx c
1 ‚Üí. . .
and
c‚à® ‚äóx 0 ‚Üíc ‚à® ‚äóx 1 ‚Üí. . .
8. LECTURE VIII: NUCLEAR MODULES 79
are isomorphic as a consequence of Lemma 8.2. Whencis compact, we can take maps from the
unit object and then pull in the colimits. We deduce thatxis nuclear.
Next, note that any basic nuclear is a sequential colimit ofcompactobjects under trace-class
maps. Indeed, ifx= lim‚àí ‚Üíxn along trace-class maps, by Lemma 8.4 we can factor eachx n ‚Üíx n+1
asx n ‚Üíc n ‚Üíx n+1 wherec n is compact andx n ‚Üíc n is trace-class. Then thec n with transition
maps given by the compositionsc n ‚Üíx n+1 ‚Üíc n+1 provide an equivalent ind-system where the
terms are compact and the maps are trace-class, as desired.
It follows that any basic nuclear is◊ê 1-compact inC, hence in particular in Nuc. Next we
claim that the basic nuclear objects form a stable subcategory closed under countable colimits.
It suffices to show it‚Äôs closed under cones and countable direct sums. For cones, the argument
is in [Sch20, Lecture XIII]: briefly, given a map between sequential colimits of compact objects
under trace-class maps, we can assume the map is given term-wise, and then we term-wise pass
to the cofiber; the transition maps in the cofiber isn‚Äôt necessarily trace-class, but the composition
of any two consecutive transition maps is, and that‚Äôs enough. For countable direct sums, we can
choose a representative of each term as a sequential colimit along trace-class maps, then rewrite
the countable direct sum as a sequential colimit of finite direct sums and pass to the diagonal in
the sequential colimit of sequential colimits.
Now we can prove (2). In the previous two paragraphs, we saw that every basic nuclear is
◊ê1-compact, and that the basic nuclears are stable under countable colimits. Thus it suffices to
show that for any nuclearx, if Hom(y, x) = 0 for all basic nucleary, thenx= 0. Thus suppose
Hom(y, x) = 0, and letcbe compact. We will show that any mapc‚Üíxis 0, which will implyx= 0
becauseCis compactly generated. But indeed, by repeatedly applying Lemma 8.4, we deduce that
c‚Üíxfactors through a basic nuclear; hence by hypothesis it is the zero map.‚ñ°
By this, every nuclear object is an◊ê 1-filtered colimit of basic nuclear objects. Thus, to under-
stand nuclear objects, to a large degree we reduce to understanding basic nuclear objects.
Now we turn to our case of interest, which is
C=D(Liq p).
We would like to gain an understanding of the basic nuclear objects inC. By the above, every
basic nuclear is a sequential colimit of compact objects with trace-class transition maps. Actually,
it suffices to only look at those compact objects which can be represented by finite complexes where
each term is of the formM <p(S) forSprofinite, as these already contain a generating family of
compact objects closed under shifts and finite colimits.
Using this we can make the following further reduction.
Lemma8.7.Every basic nuclear inD(Liq p)is represented by a complex which is a sequential
colimit of complexes
lim‚àí ‚Üín
C(n)
‚Ä¢
such that:
(1) Each termC (n)
k of each complexC (n)
‚Ä¢ is a measure spaceM <p(S)withS‚ààProf;
(2) each mapC (n)
‚Ä¢ ‚ÜíC (n+1)
‚Ä¢ is term-wise given by a trace-class map between measure spaces.
Proof.We will need to use the following non-trivial facts about theseM <p(S): first, the
(derived) dual
M<p(S)‚à® = RHom(M<p(S),R) = RHom (Z[S],R)
80 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
sits in degree 0; and second,M <p(S) is flat. The first was proved in [Sch19, Lecture III] and the
second was proved in Lecture III of these notes.
To prove the claim, we need to see that every trace-class map in the derived category between
finite complexesM ‚Ä¢, N‚Ä¢ with terms of the formM <p(S) can be represented by an honest map of
complexes which is trace-class in each term. But indeed, a trace-class map in the derived category
comes from a class in
H0((M‚Ä¢)‚à® ‚äóL N‚Ä¢)(‚àó)),
where we a priori use the derived dual and derived tensor product. But by the facts we just recalled,
these are the same as the underived dual and underived tensor product. Thus we see that classes
inH 0((M‚Ä¢)‚à® ‚äóL N‚Ä¢)(‚àó)) always come from degree 0 cycles in the tensor product of complexes
(Hom(M‚Ä¢,R)‚äóN ‚Ä¢)(‚àó).
Unwinding, such a degree 0 cycle exactly gives a map of complexesM ‚Ä¢ ‚ÜíN ‚Ä¢ which is trace-class
in each term and induces our original map in the derived category.‚ñ°
Next we analyze these trace-class mapsM <p(S)‚Üí M <p(T). It will be convenient to allowS
andTalso to be locally profinite as in Lecture IV, because we‚Äôll soon want to switch to sequence
spaces.
Proposition8.8.LetSandTbe locally profinite spaces. Then a mapf:M <p(S)‚Üí M <p(T)
inD(Liq p)is trace-class if and only there is aq < pand aq-summable sequence of real numbers
(Œªn)such thatffactors as the following kind of composite:
M<p(S)‚Üíc 0(N) ¬∑Œª‚Üíl q(N)‚äÇ M <p(N)‚Üí M <p(T),
where the two outer maps are arbitrary and the displayed map is termwise multiplication by our
sequence(Œª n)(see Lemma 4.7).
Proof.Trace-class mapsM <p(S)‚Üí M <p(T) come from classes in
(C0(S;R)‚äó R<p M<p(T))(‚àó),
where here again we use that the derived dual ofM <p(S) lives in degree 0, given by the Banach
spaceC 0(S;R) of continuous functionsS‚ÜíRvanishing at‚àû, and thatM <p(T) is flat. By
Lemma 2.16 from Lecture II,C 0(S;R) admits a surjection from a direct sum of copies ofM <p(N),
corresponding to nullsequences in the Banach spaceC 0(S;R). On the other hand, we have
M<p(N)‚äó R<p M<p(T) =M <p(N√óT)
by Lemma 4.4, and this is the subset of
Y
N
M<p(T)
consisting of those sequences of< p-measures onTwhich are of the form
(ŒªnŒºn)n‚ààN
where (Œªn) is a sequence of real numbers which is< p-summable and theŒº n are uniformly bounded,
i.e. there is aq < pandC >0 such thatŒº n ‚àà M(T) lq‚â§C for alln.
In total, we deduce that trace-class mapsf:M <p(S)‚Üí M <p(T) are exactly those of the
following form: take the following data:
(1) A null-sequenceœÜ 1, œÜ2, . . .inC 0(S;R);
8. LECTURE VIII: NUCLEAR MODULES 81
(2) A< p-summable sequenceŒª 1, Œª2, . . .of real numbers;
(3) A uniformly bounded sequenceŒº 1, Œº2, . . .of< p-measures onT;
and produce from them the mapf:M <p(S)‚Üí M <p(T) given by
f| S(s) =
‚àûX
n=1
ŒªnœÜn(s)Œºn.
Up to replacing ‚Äúuniformly bounded sequenceŒº 1, Œº2, . . .of< p-measures onT‚Äù by ‚Äúnullsequence
Œº1, Œº2, . . .of< p-measures onT‚Äù, this corresponds exactly to writingfas a composite of three
maps as in the statement. So to finish it suffices to show that we can arrange it so thatŒº 1, Œº2, . . .
is a nullsequence. For this we can write the nullsequence of norms of theœÜ 1, œÜ2, . . .as a product of
two null-sequences and move one of them over as coefficients on theŒº n.‚ñ°
It follows that any nuclear object inD(Liq p) lies in the stable cocomplete subcategory generated
byM <p(N), and in particular any nuclear object isœâ 1-condensed. However, by Proposition 3.15,
M<p(N) is a compact projective object inœâ 1-condensedp-liquid modules. It follows that we can
run the above arguments inside the smaller stable cocomplete category generated byM <p(N) to
deduce that, in the description of basic nuclears given by Lemma 8.7, we can useM <p(N)‚Äôs instead
ofM <p(S)‚Äôs as the terms in our complex.
But now that we‚Äôre in this sequence space context, we have the following further refinement:
Proposition8.9.Every basic nuclear inD(Liq p)is represented by a complex which is a se-
quential colimit of complexes
lim‚àí ‚Üín
C(n)
‚Ä¢
such that:
(1) eachC (n)
k is equal toM <p(N);
(2) each mapC (n)
‚Ä¢ ‚ÜíC (n+1)
‚Ä¢ is term-wise given by aninjectivetrace-class map between
M<p(N)‚Äôs.
Proof.The new information is that we can arrange the transition maps to be termwise in-
jective. Working our way along inductively, it suffices to show that iff:C ‚Ä¢ ‚ÜíD ‚Ä¢ is term-wise
trace class map of finite complexes with each term equal toM <p(N), then by direct summing an
acyclic complex toD ‚Ä¢ we can arrange thatfbe term-wise injective, but still trace-class. For that,
choose arbitrarily an injective trace-class mapg i :C i ‚ÜíD i for alli(e.g. takeg i to be termwise
multiplication by a< p-summable sequence of nonzero real numbers), and replaceD ‚Ä¢ by
D‚Ä≤
‚Ä¢ =D ‚Ä¢ ‚äï
M
i
h
Di
id‚ÜíD i
i
[i]
and take the new mapf ‚Ä≤ :C ‚Ä¢ ‚ÜíD ‚Ä≤
‚Ä¢ to be the old mapfon theD ‚Ä¢ component, and on the
i-component to be the map which isg i in degreeiandg i ‚ó¶din degreei+ 1.‚ñ°
In particular, every basic nuclear is represented by a complex where each term is a sequential
colimit of sequence spacesM <p(N) under injective trace-class maps. Next we will identify this
class of spaces with the classicaldual nuclear Frechetspaces. But first, we start by recalling the
definition and some background on these.
82 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
The most convenient form of the definition of a DNF (dual nuclear Frechet) space involves
Hilbert spaces, which we may as well take to bel 2(N). In the Hilbert space context, there is
a somewhat more direct analog of the notion of trace-class map, based on thesingular value
decomposition, which we start with.
A mapf:l 2(N)‚Üíl 2(N) is said to be acompact operatorifffactors through the inclu-
sionl 2(N)‚äÇ M 2(N). Iffis a compact operator, then attached tofis a unique non-increasing
nullsequence of non-negative real numbers
œÉ1 ‚â•œÉ 2 ‚â•. . . ,
called thesingular valuesoff, such that after orthonormal basis change in both source and target
(independently),fis represented by the diagonal matrix with entries theœÉ n. This is called the
singular value decomposition off.
The proof is not difficult: the function|f|:M(N) l2‚â§1 ‚ÜíR ‚â•0 attains a maximum value which
we callœÉ 1, and it follows that there aree 0, e‚Ä≤
0 ‚ààl 2(N) of norm 1 such thatf(e 0) =œÉ 1e‚Ä≤
0. Then
we pass to the orthogonal complement ofe 0 in the sourcel 2(N) ande ‚Ä≤
0 in the targetl 2(N), and
continue inductively.
This leads to the following definition, see [Sch13] for this and the unjustified claims below:
Definition8.10.Let 0< p <‚àû. A mapf:l 2(N)‚Üíl 2(N) is said to bep-Schattenif it is
compact, and its singular values satisfy
X
n
œÉp
n <‚àû.
We have the following properties:
(1) Iffisp-Schatten andg, hare arbitrary, theng‚ó¶f‚ó¶hisp-Schatten.
(2) Iffisp-Schatten andq > p, thenfisq-Schatten.
(3) Iffisp-Schatten andgisq-Schatten, thenf‚ó¶gisr-Schatten where 1
r = 1
p + 1
q . (In
particular, the composition of twop-Schatten maps isp/2-Schatten.)
The first two are simple to prove, while the third is a bit tricky due to the change of basis
involved in puttingfandginto diagonal form. But in the end it does reduce to the H Ãà older
inequality just as for compositions of diagonal matrices.
The case of 2-Schatten maps is somehow nicest from a Hilbert space perspective, and has a
separate name: a 2-Schatten map is also called a Hilbert-Schmidt map. In terms of infinite matrices,
an operator is Hilbert-Schmidt if and only if the totall 2-norm of the matrix is finite.
Here, then, is the definition of a dual nuclear Frechet space.
Definition8.11.A condensed abelian groupVis called a DNF space if it is a sequential
filtered colimit of Hilbert spaces along injective 2-Schatten transition maps.
By the above properties, we get an equivalent definition if we replace 2 bypin this definition,
for any 0< p <‚àû. Now let us make the connection with our previous discussion. Recall that we
showed that every basic nuclear inD(Liq p) can be represented by a complex where each term is a
sequential colimit of sequence spacesM <p(N) under injective trace-class transition maps.
Lemma8.12.Ap-liquidVis a DNF space if and only if it is isomorphic to a sequential colimit
of sequence spacesM <p(N)under injective trace-class transition maps.
8. LECTURE VIII: NUCLEAR MODULES 83
Proof.First, assumeVis a DNF space, and write it as a union
V= lim‚àí ‚Üín
Hn
of Hilbert spaces under injective transition maps, such that the singular values of each transition
map can be written as a product
œÉk =Œ± kŒªkŒ≤k,
where (Œ± k) and (Œ≤ n) are nullsequences and (Œª k) is ap/2-summable sequence. Then by choosing
suitable orthonormal bases, we can factor each transition mapH n ‚ÜíH n+1 as
Hn
¬∑Œ±‚Üíc 0(N) ¬∑Œª‚Üíl p/2(N)‚äÇ M <p(N)
Œ≤
‚ÜíH n+1,
where we use termwise multilication by the two null-sequences on the outside maps and thep/2-
summable sequence (Œª n) in the middle.
Note that all these maps are injective because eachœÉ n Ã∏= 0 due to injectivity of our original
transition maps. Then if we consider just theM <p(N) terms and the induced transition maps
between them, then these transition maps are injective, but also trace class by the criterion of
Lemma 8.8. And we see that the ind-system of Hilbert spaces is isomorphic to the ind-system of
M<p(N)‚Äôs, in particular proving thatVis a sequential union ofM <p(N)‚Äôs under injective trace
class maps.
Conversely, supposeVis a sequential colimit ofM <p(N)‚Äôs along injective trace-class transition
maps. Factor then th transition map as
M<p(N)‚Üíc 0(N) ¬∑Œª‚Üíl q(N)‚äÇ M <p(N)‚Üí M <p(N)
according to Lemma 8.8, and then further factorc 0(N) ¬∑Œª‚Üíl q(N) as
c0(N) ¬∑Œª
q
2
‚Üíl 2(N) ¬∑Œª
2‚àíq
2
‚Üíl q(N).
(Implicitly,q < pandŒªdepend onn, but this is not relevant for the argument.) Then for the
ind-system formed by thesel 2(N) spaces, each transition map factors as
l2(N)‚Üíc 0(N) ¬∑Œ±‚Üíl 2(N)
where the second map is given by termwise multiplication with a 2-summable sequence (Œ±j) (=Œª
q
2 ).
Now, the first map corresponds to a sequence of elements of the dual space ofl 2(N) which is in
particular uniformly bounded. However, the dual space ofl 2(N) identifies (on underlying Banach
spaces) withl 2(N) again via the inner product. Thus we get a uniformly bounded sequence of
elementsx i inl 2(N) such that our transition map is given by the matrix whose (i, j)-entry is
Œ±j ¬∑ ‚ü®Œ¥i, xj‚ü©.
This matrix is clearly Hilbert-Schmidt, i.e. the transition maps are 2-Schatten. However, they need
not be injective. Nonetheless, our originalVis a filtered union of qs spaces hence and hence is also
qs, so we can conclude thatVis a DNF space thanks to the following lemma.‚ñ°
Lemma8.13.Let0< p <‚àû. SupposeV= lim ‚àí ‚Üín Hn is a sequential colimit of Hilbert spaces
withp-Schatten transition maps. IfVis qs, thenVis also a sequential colimit of Hilbert spaces
with injectivep-Schatten transition maps, meaningVis a DNF space.
84 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Proof.LetH ‚Ä≤
n ‚äÇVdenote the image ofH n inV. ThenH ‚Ä≤
n is also a Hilbert space! Indeed,
the inclusion ker(H n ‚ÜíV)‚äÇH n is a quasi-compact map sinceVis qs; thus, since Hilbert spaces
are compactly generated, this kernel corresponds to a closed subspace of the Hilbert spaceH n.
But every closed subspace of a Hilbert space is a Hilbert space, and moreover the inclusion has a
complement given by the orthogonal subspace. It follows thatH ‚Ä≤
n, which is the quotient ofH n by
this kernel, is also a Hilbert space, since it identifies with this orthogonal complement. Moreover,
the inclusionH ‚Ä≤
n ‚äÇH ‚Ä≤
n+1 then factors throughH n ‚ÜíH n+1 ‚ÜíH ‚Ä≤
n+1, so it is alsop-Schatten.‚ñ°
By similar arguments we prove the following permanence properties of DNF spaces, due to
Grothendieck.
Lemma8.14.
(1) LetVbe a DNF space, andWan arbitrary qs condensedR-module. For any homomor-
phismf:V‚ÜíW, we have thatker(f)andim(f)are DNF spaces.
(2) Any extension of DNF spaces is a DNF space.
Proof.The proof of (1) is very similar to the argument in the previous lemma; we skip it. For
(2), writeV= lim‚àí ‚Üín Vn as a sequential colimit of sequence spacesM <p(N) with injective trace-class
transition maps. Any extension 0‚ÜíW‚Üí eV‚ÜíV‚Üí0 is split over eachM <p(N), because these
M<p(N) are compact projective inœâ 1-condensedp-liquid spaces. Thus, choosing such a splitting
for eachnwith no mind for compatibility, we can write
eV= lim‚àí ‚Üín
(Vn ‚äïW),
where the transition map
Vn ‚äïW‚ÜíV n+1 ‚äïW
is given by block upper triangular matrix: the mapV n ‚ÜíV n+1 is the original transition map, the
mapW‚ÜíWis the identity, the mapW‚ÜíV n+1 is 0, and the mapV n ‚ÜíWis just some arbitrary
map. However, any mapV n ‚ÜíWis trace class and moreover factors through a trace class map
to someW œÜ(n) with respect to an analogous presentation ofWbyM <p(N)‚Äôs. We can assume
œÜ:N‚ÜíNto be an increasing function, and then we can write
eV= lim‚àí ‚Üín
(Vn ‚äïW œÜ(n)),
where now this is an expression which proves that eVhas the same form asVandW, meaning it‚Äôs
DNF. ‚ñ°
Now we can finally give the desired characterization of basic nuclear liquid modules.
Theorem8.15.LetX‚àà D(Liq p). The following are equivalent:
(1)Xis basic nuclear, i.e.Xis a sequential colimit along trace-class maps;
(2)Xcan be represented by a complex of DNF spaces;
(3) Each homology groupH n(X)is isomorphic to a quotient of DNF spaces;
(4)Xlies in the smallest countably cocomplete stable subcategory generated by the DNF spaces.
Proof.We have already seen that (1)‚áí(2). The claim (2)‚áí(3) follows from the first part
of the previous lemma. For the claim (3)‚áí(4), by considering canonical truncations and shifting
we can assumeXis concentrated in homologically non-negative degrees. It suffices to show that
8. LECTURE VIII: NUCLEAR MODULES 85
there‚Äôs a DNF spaceVwith a mapV‚ÜíXsurjective onH 0, and that the cone of this map also
satisfies the same condition (3). For then we can continue inductively and get resolution ofXby
DNF spaces, proving (4). However, by assumption we can find a DNFVwith a surjective map
V‚ÜíH 0Xwhose kernel is a DNF. This map lifts toV‚ÜíXbecause the obstructions to this
lifting all live in Ext i(V;‚àí) fori‚â•2 which vanishes becauseVis a sequential colimit of compact
projectives. To see that the cone also satisfies (3), we need to show that an extension of a DNF
spaceVby a quotientW/W ‚Ä≤ of DNF spaces is still a quotient of DNF spaces. However, the same
Ext2-vanishing used above shows that any extension ofVbyW/W ‚Ä≤ lifts to an extension ofVby
W. Such an extension eVis a DNF space by the previous lemma, and then our original extension
is eV /W ‚Ä≤, a quotient of DNF spaces as desired. Finally, for (4)‚áí(1), we have already seen that
DNF spaces are basic nuclear and that the full subcategory of basic nuclears is stable and closed
under countable colimits.‚ñ°
We have a series of remarkable corollaries; the proofs are immediate.
Corollary8.16.An objectX‚àà D(Liq p)is basic nuclear if and only if each homology group
Hn(X)[0]is basic nuclear. Likewise, an objectX‚àà D(Liq p)is nuclear if and only if each homology
groupH n(X)[0]is nuclear.
Corollary8.17.The collection of basic nuclears living in degree0is an abelian subcategory
ofLiq p, closed under extensions and countable colimits. It consists exactly of the quotients of DNF
spaces.
The collection of nuclear objects living in degree0is likewise an abelian subcategory ofLiq p,
closed under extensions and arbitrary colimits. It consists exactly of the (◊ê 1-filtered) colimits of
quotients of DNF spaces.
Corollary8.18.The collections of nuclear and basic nuclear modules inD(Liq p)are inde-
pendent ofp, and also independent of which uncountable strong limit cut-off cardinal one chooses
in the foundations for condensed sets. The derived liquid tensor product is likewise independent of
pon the class of nuclear modules.
We finish by discussing a technical issue which will arise in the following lecture. Recall that
the definition of nuclear was that
(c‚à® ‚äóx)(‚àó)‚ÜíHom(c, x)
should be an isomorphism for all compact objectsc. One could ask whether the a priori stronger
condition
c‚à® ‚äóx ‚àº‚Üíx c
then automatically holds. In the abstract set-up we see no reason why this should be true. But
now we can nonetheless prove it for liquid modules. In fact we have the more general:
Proposition8.19.LetVbe a nuclear object inD(Liq p), and letSbe a compact Hausdorff
space. Then
RHom(Z[S],R)‚äó L
<p V ‚àº‚ÜíRHom (Z[S], V).
Proof.First note that RHom (Z[S],R) =C(S;R) is concentrated in degree 0, by [Sch19,
Lecture III]. Now, the functor RHom (Z[S],‚àí) commutes with◊ê 1-filtered colimits, becauseZ[S] is
86 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
a countable colimit of compact projectiveZ[S i]‚Äôs via taking a hypercover ofSby extremally discon-
nected profinite sets. Thus we reduce to proving the claim for basic nuclearV. Taking colimits of
canonical truncations, we can also assumeVis homologically concentrated in nonnegative degrees.
Now we claim that on both sides, we can pull out the limit of canonical truncations ofV. On the
right this is clear as RHom (Z[S],‚àí) commutes with all limits. On the left, this is because each
homology group ofVis a quotient of DNF‚Äôs, hence a quotient of flat objects, hence has uniformly
bounded tor-dimension, whereas we have already seen that RHom (Z[S],R) lives in degree 0. Thus
we can reduce to the case ofVa quotient of DNF‚Äôs, which reduces us to the case ofVa DNF.
To handle that case, by the intertwining argument and Lemma 8.2 part 3 it suffices to show that
RHom(Z[S],‚àí) commutes with the sequential colimit presenting the DNFV. But asZ[S] and
in fact allZ[S√óS ‚Ä≤] for profiniteS ‚Ä≤ are pseudocoherent, RHom (Z[S],‚àí) commutes with filtered
colimits of coconnective objects.‚ñ°
Corollary8.20.LetAbe a commutative algebra inD(Liq p)such that the underlying object
ofAis nuclear inD(Liq p). Then an objectM‚ààC= Mod A(D(Liqp))is nuclear (in the sense of
C) if and only if the underlying object ofD(Liq p)is nuclear (in the sense ofD(Liq p)).
Proof.ForM‚ààMod A(D(Liqp)), nuclearity overAmeans that for all extremally disconnected
S, the map
(RHom(Z[S], A)‚äó L
<p,A M)(‚àó)‚ÜíM(S)
is an isomorphism. But the left-hand side agrees with (RHom (Z[S],C)‚äó L
<p M)(‚àó), leading to the
definition of nuclearity ofMinD(Liq p).‚ñ°
Exercise 1.Recall that the category Solid Z of solid abelian groups has compact projective
generators of the form Q
I Z, with
Hom(
Y
I
Z,
Y
J
Z) =
Y
J
M
I
Z,
and with a tensor product such that
Y
I
Z‚äó
Y
J
Z=
Y
I√óJ
Z.
Show that an object inD(Solid Z) is nuclear if and only if it is discrete, i.e. lies in the cocomplete
stable full subcategory generated by the unitZ.
Exercise 2.Show that the definition of compactness of an operatorf:l 2(N)‚Üíl 2(N) given in
the lecture, namelyfis compact ifffactors throughM 2(N), is equivalent to the usual definition:
fis compact if there is an open neighborhoodU‚äÇl 2(N) of the origin and a compact subset
K‚äÇl 2(N) such thatf(U)‚äÇK.
9. LECTURE IX: COHERENT SHEAVES, I 87
9. Lecture IX: Coherent Sheaves, I
The goal of this lecture and the next is to develop the theory of coherent sheaves on complex-
analytic spaces, by isolating them inside the very large (derived) category of ‚Äúliquid quasicoherent
sheaves‚Äù. In this lecture, our goal is to isolate the pseudocoherent complexes of (abstract) modules
inside the category of all liquid modules, and show that this category localizes onC n. In the next
lecture, we will go from the level of complexes to the abelian level.
Let us start with the general nonsense. Take any closed symmetric monoidal compactly gener-
ated stable‚àû-categoryC, such that 1‚ààCis compact. IfA= End(1) is the endomorphism algebra
of 1 (a ‚Äúcommutative algebra in‚àû-category land‚Äù, known as anE ‚àû-algebra), then one gets a full
embedding
D(A),‚ÜíC
of the category ofA-modules in spectra intoC. IfAhappens to be concentrated in degree 0, then
D(A) is just the usual derived‚àû-category of (abstract)A-modules. For example, ifC=D(Liq p),
one gets a full embedding
D(R),‚Üí D(Liq p)
from the derived‚àû-category of (abstract)R-vector spaces into that ofp-liquidR-vector spaces.
Definition9.1.An objectV‚ààCis discrete if it lies in the essential iamge ofD(A),‚ÜíC;
equivalently, if it lies in the subcategory generated under shift and colimits by 1‚ààC.
As the subcategory of discrete objects is just the category of abstract modules overA, it is very
easy to understand. In particular, if one intersects it with the class of compact objects, one just
gets perfect complexes ofA-modules:
Proposition9.2.An objectV‚ààCis compact and discrete if and only if it lies in the sub-
category generated under retracts, shifts, and finite colimits by1‚ààC, i.e. corresponds to a perfect
complex ofA-modules.
Proof.Recall thatD(A) is compactly generated, with compact objects the perfect complexes
ofA-modules. As compact objects ofCare stable under retracts, shifts, and finite colimits, all
perfect complexes ofA-modules give compact (and discrete) objects ofC. Conversely, ifV‚ààCis
discrete and compact, then it is also compact as an object ofD(A) (asD(A)‚äÇCis stable under
all colimits), and hence corresponds to a perfect complex ofA-modules.‚ñ°
On the other hand, it is a very fragile category ‚Äì many natural operations leave the category
of discrete objects. For this reason, the more general class of nuclear objects was introduced in
the last lecture. It turns out that the previous proposition has a natural analogue when replacing
discrete by nuclear, in which case it singles out the important class of dualizable objects ofC.
Recall thatV‚ààCis dualizable if there exists someV ‚Ä≤ ‚ààCtogether with mapsŒ±: 1‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚äóV,
Œ≤:V‚äóV ‚Ä≤ ‚Üí1 such that the composites
V 1‚äóŒ±‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV‚äóV ‚Ä≤ ‚äóV
Œ≤‚äó1
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV
and
V ‚Ä≤ Œ±‚äó1‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV‚Ä≤ ‚äóV‚äóV ‚Ä≤ 1‚äóŒ≤
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV‚Ä≤
are the identity. In that case, for anyW, one has a canonical isomorphismW V =V ‚Ä≤ ‚äóW; in
particularV ‚Ä≤ =V ‚à® is the dual ofV(makingŒ≤the evaluation map).
88 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Proposition9.3.An objectV‚ààCis compact and nuclear if and only if it is dualizable.
Proof.Assume first thatVis dualizable. Then Hom(V,‚àí) = (V ‚Ä≤ ‚äó ‚àí)(‚àó) commutes with all
colimits, soVis compact. Also, Hom(V, V) = (V ‚Ä≤ ‚äóV)(‚àó), and in particular any mapf:V‚ÜíV
is trace-class, for example the identity. ThenVis the sequential colimit ofV, with transition maps
the identity, which is trace-class; soVis basic nuclear.
Conversely, assumeVis compact and nuclear. LetV ‚Ä≤ =V ‚à®, withŒ≤the evaluation map. We
want to produce a coevaluation mapŒ±: 1‚ÜíV ‚à® ‚äóVin order to show thatVis dualizable. Such
anŒ±is an element of (V ‚à® ‚äóV)(‚àó). AsVis compact andVis nuclear, this agrees with Hom(V, V).
But here we have the identity ofV, giving the desiredŒ±. It is a simple exercise to check that the
diagrams commute. ‚ñ°
We note that this gives a way to construct dualizable objects.
Proposition9.4.LetV‚ààCbe compact and letf:V‚ÜíVbe a trace-class map. Then the
cone[V
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV]of the endomorphism1‚àífonVis a dualizable object ofC. Conversely, any
dualizable object ofCis a retract of an object of this form.
Proof.Clearly, the cone of 1‚àífis compact (as a finite colimit of compactV‚Äôs). Now note
that the mapf:V‚ÜíVinduces an isomorphism on [V
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV] (as on the cone,fbecomes equal
to 1). Thus, passing to the sequential colimit over multiplication byf, one can write the cone also
as the cone of [W
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíW] whereWis the sequential colimit ofV
f
‚àí ‚ÜíV
f
‚àí ‚ÜíV . . .. ThenWis
(basic) nuclear, and hence so is the cone.
For the converse, note that ifVis dualizable, then it is compact, and the identity ofVis
trace-class, so [V 0‚àí ‚ÜíV] belongs to the class of dualizable objects produced in this way. ButVis a
retract of [V 0‚àí ‚ÜíV]. ‚ñ°
Remark9.5.The proof shows more generally that ifV‚ààCis compact andf:V‚ÜíVis
an endomorphism such that some powerf n :V‚ÜíVis trace-class, then the cone [V
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV] is
dualizable.
Example9.6.Let us give an example of a dualizable object that is not discrete. Consider
A=C[T], andC=D(Liq p(A)). LetVbe the DNF space of sequences of at most polynomial
growth, and turn it into aC[T]-module by lettingTact via diagonal multiplication by (1,2,3, . . .).
We claim thatVis dualizable. Indeed, ifV 0 =M <p(Œ≤N)‚äóC[T] is the compact projective generator,
and we consider the endomorphismf:V 0 ‚ÜíV 0 given by diagonal multiplication by (T, T
2 , T
3 , . . .),
thenf N is trace-class for sufficiently largeN(depending onp). Moreover, to compute the cone
V0
1‚àí(T, T
2 , T
3 ,...)
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV0
we can first take the colimit along diagonal multiplication by (1, 1
2 , 1
3 , . . .), leading to the spaceV[T]
of polynomials of sequences of at most polynomial growth. Then we get the cone
V[T]
1‚àí(T, T
2 , T
3 ,...)
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV[T]
which can also be written as the cone
V[T]
(1,2,3,...)‚àíT
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV[T]
9. LECTURE IX: COHERENT SHEAVES, I 89
and hence is given byVwithTacting by multiplication by (1,2,3, . . .).
In many cases, it will turn out that all dualizable objects ofCare in fact discrete, i.e. are
perfect complexes ofA-modules. By Proposition 9.4 this is the case if and only if cones [V
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV]
are discrete. Here, 1‚àífis a perturbation of the isomorphism 1 :V‚ÜíVby a trace-class operator.
Classically, ifVis say a Hilbert space, such things are Fredholm operators, and Fredholm operators
have finite-dimensional kernel and cokernel, leading to the desired discreteness. Abstractly, we make
the following definition:
Definition9.7.LetCbe a closed symmetric monoidal compactly generated stable‚àû-category
with compact unit, as above. ThenCis Fredholm if all dualizable objects ofCare discrete;
equivalently, if for all compactV‚ààCand trace-class endomorphismsf:V‚ÜíV, the cone
[V
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíV] is discrete.
We will be interested in verifying this condition in our situations of interest. Thus, assume
from now on thatC=D(A) for some closed symmetric monoidal abelian categoryAgenerated
by compact projective objectsA cp ‚äÇ A, and with 1‚àà Acompact projective. 11 In this situation,
A= End(1) is concentrated in degree 0, i.e. is a usual commutative ring.
We make the following auxiliary hypothesis:
Assumption9.8.For all compact projectiveT‚àà A, the dualT ‚à® ‚àà D(A)is concentrated in
degree0. Equivalently, for all compact projectiveT, T ‚Ä≤ ‚àà A, one hasExt i
A(T1 ‚äóT 2, A) = 0for
i >0, whereA= End(1)as before.
It turns out that this is a pretty mild assumption. Under this assumption, we note that for
T‚àà Acompact projective, trace-class endomorphisms come from (T ‚à® ‚äóT)(‚àó), where all operations
can be performed inA(as opposed toD(A)), making things more concrete.
WhenC=D(A), one can consider a generalization of the notion of compact objects. Recall
thatX‚ààCis compact if and only if it can be represented by a finite complex of compact projective
objects. Often, when building such projective resolutions, one can ensure finiteness in each degree,
but not necessarily termination. This leads to the notion of pseudocompact objects.
Definition9.9.An objectX‚àà D(A) is pseudocompact if it can be represented by a complex
of compact projectives that is bounded to the right. This is equivalent to Hom(X,‚àí) commuting
with all direct sums of objects inD ‚â§n(A), for alln.
In other words, a pseudocompact is one that can be approximated arbitrarily well (with respect
to thet-structure) by compact objects. It turns out that under Assumption 9.8, a similar assertion
holds true for compact objects replaced by dualizable objects.
Proposition9.10.Assume Assumption 9.8. Then:
(1) The subcategory of dualizable objects ofCis generated under shifts, cones, and retracts by
the cone[T
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT]for compact projectiveT‚àà Awith a trace-class endomorphismf.
(2) Any nuclear and pseudocompact objectXofCcan be written as a sequential colimit
X= lim‚àí ‚Üín Xn where eachX n is dualizable, and the cone ofX n ‚ÜíXlives inD ‚â•n(A).
11In this situation,Ccan also be described as the finite-product preserving functors from (A cp)op to spectra.
One could more generally allow such functor categories from additive‚àû-categories. This generalization is relevant
when one allows animated rings.
90 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
In particular, by (1),Cis Fredholm if and only if for all compact projectiveT‚àà Awith trace-class
endomorphismf:T‚ÜíT, the cone[T
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT]is discrete. In that case, by (2) all nuclear and
pseudocoherent objects ofCare discrete, and hence are given byD pc(A)‚äÇC.
Proof.We show that any nuclear and pseudocompact objectXofCcan be written as a
sequential colimitX= lim‚àí ‚Üín Xn where eachX n lies in the subcategory generated under shifts and
cones by objects [T
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT] as in (1), and the cone ofX n ‚ÜíXlies inD ‚â•n(A). This clearly gives
part (2). But in (1), the objectXis compact, and hence for somenit is a retract ofX n, giving
also (1).
To prove this claim, assume we already haveX n so thatY n := [Xn ‚ÜíX]‚àà D ‚â•n(A). We will
find someT n andf n with a map [T n
1‚àífn
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíTn][n]‚ÜíY n whose coneY n+1 lies inD ‚â•n+1(A). In
that case, the fibreX n+1 of the compositeX‚ÜíY n ‚ÜíY n+1 is an extension ofX n and a shift of
[Tn
1‚àífn
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíTn], giving the desired induction step.
Shifting, we can assume now thatn= 0. Our task is to show that givenX‚àà D ‚â•0(A) that is
pseudocompact and nuclear, there is some compact projectiveT 0 and some trace-class endomor-
phismf 0 :T 0 ‚ÜíT 0 such that there is a map [T 0
1‚àíf0
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT0]‚ÜíX 0 that is surjective in homological
degree 0. By pseudocompactness, we can representXby a complex
. . .‚ÜíT 2 ‚ÜíT 1 ‚ÜíT 0 ‚Üí0
of compact projective objectsT i in nonnegative homological degrees. In particular, we get a map
g:T 0 ‚ÜíX. Note that by nuclearity ofX, this comes from some class in (T ‚à®
0 ‚äóX)(‚àó). But asT ‚à®
0
sits in degree 0 andg:T 0 ‚ÜíXis surjective in degree 0, the map
(T ‚à®
0 ‚äóT 0)(‚àó)‚Üí(T ‚à®
0 ‚äóX)(‚àó)
induced byg:T 0 ‚ÜíXis surjective. In other words, we can find a trace-class endorphismf 0 :
T0 ‚ÜíT 0 such thatgf 0 =ginD(A). This means that the mapg:T 0 ‚ÜíXcan be factored over a
map [T0
1‚àíf0
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT0]‚ÜíX. This is necessarily surjective in degree 0 asgis.‚ñ°
This finishes the abstract nonsense. In order to apply this, we need to verify the Fredholm
property.
Proposition9.11.LetAbe a (p-)Banach algebra overR. ThenC=D(Liq p(A))satisfies
Assumption 9.8, and is Fredholm. More generally, this holds true ifAis a filtered colimit of
p-Banach algebras.
Proof.First, we reduce the case of filtered colimits to the case ofp-Banach algebras, so assume
A= lim‚àí ‚Üíi Ai is a filtered colimit of Banach algebras. Any compact projectiveTin Liq p(A) is the
base change of a compact projectiveT i in Liq p(Ai) (as any idempotent endomorphism of some
M<p(S)‚äó <p Ais already defined over someA i). Its dual is then
RHomAi(Ti, A) = lim‚àí ‚Üíj‚â•i
RHomAi(Ti, Aj),
which is the filtered colimit of the duals ofT i ‚äóL
<p,Ai Aj. (The justification for the commutation
with the colimit is as in Proposition 8.19.) Also, any trace-class endomorphismf:T‚ÜíTis also
the base change of some trace-class endomorphismf i :T i ‚ÜíT i for large enoughi, in which case
[T
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT] is the base change of [Ti
1‚àífi
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíTi]. Thus, we can assume thatAis ap-Banach algebra.
9. LECTURE IX: COHERENT SHEAVES, I 91
For anyp-Banach vector spaceV, one has RHom (Z[S], V) =C(S, V), concentrated in degree
0, for any profiniteS; this gives Assumption 9.8 (as any other compact projective is a retract of
a base change ofZ[S]). Now we have to verify the key assertion that for all compact projective
T‚ààLiq p(A) with a trace-class endomorphismf:T‚ÜíT, the cone [T
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT] is discrete. Note
that iff:T‚ÜíTfactors asT
g
‚àí ‚ÜíT‚Ä≤ h‚àí ‚ÜíT, then lettingf ‚Ä≤ =gh:T ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíT ‚Ä≤, the mapginduces an
isomorphism [T
1‚àíf
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT]‚àº= [T ‚Ä≤ 1‚àíf ‚Ä≤
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíT‚Ä≤] (with inverse induced byh). In particular, we can assume
T=M <p(S)‚äó <p Ais a standard generator, withSextremally disconnected. The trace-class maps
are then induced by elements of
C(S, A)‚äó <p M<p(S).
By the arguments in the proof of Proposition 8.8, any trace-class map factors overM <p(N)‚äó <p A.
Thus, we can also consider a trace-class endomorphism ofM <p(N)‚äó <p A, which is induced by an
element of
c0(N, A)‚äó <p M<p(N).
This can be thought of as a matrix, whose rows are given byŒª0v0, Œª1v1, . . ., for a uniformly bounded
sequence of nullsequencesv 0, v1, . . .‚ààc 0(N, A) and a< p-summable sequenceŒª 0, Œª1, . . .. We can
assume that allv i have supremum norm‚â§1. Choose someNso thats=Œª N +Œª N+1 +. . . <1,
and write the matrix in block form 
E F
G H

whereEis anN√óN-matrix containing the coefficients{0, . . . , N‚àí1} 2. Then 1‚àíHis invertible,
as the geometric series 1 +H+H 2 +. . .converges: Thei-th row ofH j is bounded in supremum
norm byŒª N+i sj‚àí1 (this is clear by definition forj= 1, and then follows by an easy induction),
and the geometric series 1 +s+s 2 +. . .converges ass <1. (It is at this step that we use thatA
is a Banach algebra ‚Äì we need to guarantee the existence of this infinite sum.)
Now by easy matrix manipulations, this means that one can write
1‚àíE‚àíF
‚àíG1‚àíH

=

1X
0 1

E‚Ä≤ 0
0 1‚àíH

1 0
Y1

,
where the first and last factor are invertible, as well as the lower part 1‚àíHof the middle matrix.
This means that the cone of 1‚àífonM <p(N)‚äó <p Acan be rewritten as the cone ofE ‚Ä≤ on the
finite freeA-moduleM <p({0, . . . , N‚àí1})‚äó <p A=A N, which is thus discrete.‚ñ°
Finally, we apply this machinery to complex analysis. We will use the following definition. 12
Definition9.12.A compact subsetZ‚äÇC n is Stein if the corresponding idempotentC[X1, . . . , Xn]-
algebraO(Z)‚àà D(Liq p(C[X1, . . . , Xn])) is concentrated in degree 0.
Note that, by the cofinality of open and closed neighborhoods, one can write
O(Z) = lim‚àí ‚ÜíU‚äÉZ
RŒì(U,O)
and by the computation of the structure sheaf, this sits in cohomological degrees‚â•0. Thus, the
condition here is really thatO(Z) sits in cohomological degrees‚â§0, i.e. nonnegative homological
degrees.
12It agrees with the similar notion that exists in the literature.
92 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Any polydisc is Stein, and ifZ 1 andZ 2 are Stein, then their intersectionZ 1 ‚à©Z 2 is also Stein,
as it corresponds to the idempotent algebraO(Z 1 ‚à©Z 2) =O(Z 1)‚äó L
<p,C[X1,...,Xn] O(Z2), which sits
in nonnegative homological degrees. Using a similar argument with filtered colimits, it follows that
any intersection of Stein compact subsets is again Stein.
Proposition9.13.For any compact subsetZ‚äÇC n, the idempotent algebraO(Z)is basic
nuclear. Moreover,H 0(O(Z))is a sequential colimit of Banach algebras.
Proof.One can writeZas a sequential intersection of subsets that are finite unions of poly-
discs. The claim is stable under sequential intersections, so one can assumeZis a finite union
of polydiscs. By the formula for the idempotent algebras for finite unions, this reduces the claim
of nuclearity to intersections of polydiscs, and thus to polydiscs (for the claim aboutH 0, one can
directly reduce to the polydiscs, as closed subalgebras of Banach algebras are Banach algebras).
But for polydiscs, the presentation
O({|X1|, . . . ,|Xn| ‚â§1}) = lim‚àí ‚Üír>1
M<p({X i1
1 ¬∑ ¬∑ ¬∑X in
n /ri1+...+in}{i1,...,in‚â•0})
gives a presentation as a sequential colimit along trace-class maps, showing that it is basic nuclear.
One can also write down a similar presentation as a sequential colimit of Banach algebras.‚ñ°
Recall also the following result that follows from the abstract nonsense of Lecture V. Here, we
endow the category of compact subsets ofC n with the topology of finite covers (so{Z i ‚äÇZ}form
a cover if a finite family ofZ i‚Äôs coverZ).
Proposition9.14.The association taking any compact subsetZ‚äÇC n toMod O(Z)(D(Liqp))
defines a sheaf of‚àû-categories.
In the following, we restrict to the site of compact Stein subsets (where this result then also
applies).
The main theorem of this lecture is the following.
Theorem9.15.The association taking any compact Stein subsetZ‚äÇC n toD pc(O(Z))defines
a sheaf of‚àû-categories.
Here,D pc(O(Z))‚äÇ D(O(Z)) is the full subcategory of the derived‚àû-category of (abstract!)
O(Z)-modules that can be represented by a complex of finite projectiveO(Z)-modules that is
bounded to the right.
The theorem will be the consequence of three individual results. First:
Proposition9.16.The association taking any compact subsetZ‚äÇC n to
ModO(Z)(Nuc)‚äÇMod O(Z)(D(Liqp))
defines a sheaf of‚àû-categories. Moreover,Mod O(Z)(Nuc)agrees with the nuclear objects inMod O(Z)(D(Liqp)).
Proof.The final sentence comes from Corollary 8.20.
First, note that it defines a presheaf, as the base change‚àí ‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Z ‚Ä≤) is given by a colimit
of
. . .‚Üí ‚àí ‚äó L
<p O(Z)‚äó L
<p O(Z ‚Ä≤)‚Üí ‚àí ‚äó L
<p O(Z ‚Ä≤)
and all occuring operations preserve nuclearC-vector spaces. The fully faithfulness part of the
sheaf axiom follows from Proposition 9.14. For essential surjectivity, we have to see that ifV‚àà
9. LECTURE IX: COHERENT SHEAVES, I 93
ModO(Z)(D(Liqp)) is such that for a finite cover ofZbyZ i‚Äôs, allV i =V‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Zi) are nuclear,
thenVis nuclear. ButVcan be recovered via a finite Cech complex fromV i and the further base
changes to all finite intersections, and all of these are nuclear.‚ñ°
Note that ifZis Stein, then
ModO(Z)(D(Liqp)) =D(Liq p(O(Z)))
is the derived category ofp-liquidO(Z)-modules. In that case, we denote the nuclear objects by
Dnuc(Liqp(O(Z))).
The second input:
Proposition9.17.The association taking any compact Stein subsetZ‚äÇC n to
Dpc(Liqp(O(Z)))‚äÇ D(Liq p(O(Z))) = Mod O(Z)(D(Liqp)))
defines a sheaf of‚àû-categories.
Remark9.18.The same result holds for actual compactness, in which case the argument is
even easier. The variant for pseudocompact objects is however sometimes slightly more useful.
Proof.The key observation is that forZ ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇZ, the functor‚àí ‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Z ‚Ä≤) is of bounded
Tor-dimension. By idempotence, this can also be written as the composite of the (exact) forgetful
functor toD(Liq p(C[X1, . . . , Xn])), and the base change ofZ ‚Ä≤. The latter can also be written as the
filtered colimit over the base change to all open neighborhoodsUofZ ‚Ä≤. But ifUcorresponds to a
complementary closedW, then the base change toUis given by RHom ([1‚Üí O(W)],‚àí). Thus, it
suffices to bound the amplitude ofO(W) to the right. ButO(W) =RŒì(W,O), and the sheafOis
concentrated in degree 0. AsW‚äÇC n has finite cohomological dimension, the result follows.
Again, the association clearly defines a presheaf of‚àû-categories that satisfies the fully faithful-
ness part of the sheaf axiom. For essential surjectivity, we need to see that ifV‚àà D(Liq p(O(Z)) is
such thatV i =V‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Zi) is pseudocompact for some finite cover ofZbyZ i‚Äôs, thenVis pseu-
docompact. But one can compute HomO(Z)(V,‚àí) as a finite Cech-type limit of HomO(ZJ)(VJ ,‚àí‚äó L
<p,O(Z)
O(ZJ)) over all nonempty finite subsetsJofI. By the observation on finite Tor-dimension, any
direct sum of objects inD ‚â§n(O(Z)) stays of a similar form after base change to anyZ J (for some
possibly differentn), so the result follows.‚ñ°
Thus Theorem 9.15 reduces to:
Proposition9.19.For any compact Stein subsetZ‚äÇC n, one has an equality of full subcate-
gories:
Dpc(O(Z)) =D nuc(Liqp(O(Z)))‚à© D pc(Liqp(O(Z)))‚äÇ D(Liq p(O(Z))).
Proof.By Proposition 9.10, it suffices to see thatD(Liq p(O(Z))) is Fredholm. This follows
from Proposition 9.13 and Proposition 9.11.‚ñ°
94 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
10. Lecture X: Coherent Sheaves, II
In the last lecture, we proved the following theorem.
Theorem10.1.The association taking any compact Stein subsetZ‚äÇC n toD pc(O(Z))defines
a sheaf of‚àû-categories (with respect to the finite cover topology).
Here, a compact subsetZ‚äÇC n was defined to be Stein ifH i(Z,O) = 0 fori >0, and
Dpc(O(Z))‚äÇ D(O(Z)) was the full subcategory of objects that admit a bounded to the right (but
not necessarily finite) representative by a complex consisting of finite projectiveO(Z)-modules.
In this lecture, we will refine this result by proving a descent result on the abelian level. As a
first preparation, we note that with an essentially formal argument, one can control the amplitude
of the complexes to the right.
Corollary10.2.The association taking any compact Stein subsetZ‚äÇC n to the‚àû-category
Dpc,‚â•0(O(Z))of pseudocoherent complexes in nonnegative homological degrees defines a sheaf of
‚àû-categories (with respect to the finite cover topology).
This is some version of the Cartan‚ÄìOka Theorem on the vanishing of positive degree cohomology
of coherent sheaves on Stein spaces.
Proof.The pullback functors are well-defined, and by the previous theorem, it satisfies the
fully faithfulness part of the sheaf axiom. It remains to see that ifV‚àà D pc(O(Z)) is such that
Vi =V‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Zi) (for some finite cover ofZbyZ i‚Äôs) lies inD ‚â•0 for alli, thenV‚àà D ‚â•0. This
follows from the next lemma applied to the lowest nonzero homology group ofV.‚ñ°
Lemma10.3.LetZ‚äÇC n be compact Stein, and letMbe a finitely generatedO(Z)-module.
Assume that for allz‚ààZ, the (non-derived!) base changeM‚äó <p,O(Z) Oz = 0vanishes. Then
M= 0.
This lemma holds true in very large generality for ‚Äúanalytic rings‚Äù. We note that, crucially, the
tensor products here are underived.
Proof.AssumeMÃ∏= 0. The hypothesis passes to any quotient ofM, so we can assume that
Mis generated by one element, soM=O(Z)/Ifor some idealI‚äÇ O(Z). In that case,Macquires
the structure of anO(Z)-algebra. Thus,M‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Z ‚Ä≤) is a derived algebra, and in particular
is 0 as soon as 1 = 0 in itsH 0. By assumption, this happens in all the stalks, and thus in some
neighborhood. Thus,M‚äó L
<p,O(Z) O(Zi) = 0 for some finite cover ofZbyZ i‚Äôs. ButMcan be
recovered via a Cech complex from these base changes, soM= 0.‚ñ°
Remark10.4.Our arguments so far were of a very formal nature; we used no finiteness results
of the algebrasO(Z), and one could obtain results for many variants. For example, [And21] argues
in a very similar way to obtain such descent results on analytic adic spaces, without any noetherian
hypotheses. In such situations, it may also happen that the localization maps likeO(Z)‚Üí O(Z ‚Ä≤)
are not flat. In such a large generality, getting descent forD pc,‚â•0 is the best one can hope for;
basically, one is forced to replace modules by animated modules, and then the results say that for
pseudocoherent animated modules, descent works as expected.
It turns out that to go from Corollary 10.2 to the usual theory of coherent sheaves, one needs
to prove no further results about modules, but instead about the ringsO(Z). Here, we have the
following theorem; it is a strong form of Oka‚Äôs (first) coherence theorem [Oka50].
10. LECTURE X: COHERENT SHEAVES, II 95
Theorem10.5.LetZ‚äÇC n be compact Stein.
(1) The ringO(Z)is coherent, i.e. any finitely generated ideal is finitely presented.
(2) The maximal ideals ofO(Z)correspond to the points ofZ. The complete local rings of
O(Z)at closed points are formal power series algebras, and are flat overO(Z). The ring
O(Z)is flat overC[X 1, . . . , Xn].
(3) IfZ ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇZis compact Stein, the restriction mapO(Z)‚Üí O(Z ‚Ä≤)is flat.
(4) IfZis contained in the interior of some compactZ ‚Ä≤ (not necessarily Stein), any ideal of
O(Z ‚Ä≤)becomes finitely generated after base change toO(Z).
(5) IfZis a point, thenO(Z)is noetherian.
(6) IfO(Z)is noetherian, then it is regular and excellent.
Remark10.6.It is not in general true thatO(Z) is noetherian, as for example ifZis totally
disconnected (and infinite), when there are infinitely many idempotents. In some sense, this is the
only obstruction: A theorem of Siu [Siu69] says thatO(Z) is noetherian as soon as any closed
analytic subspace has only finitely many connected components. We will come back to the question
of noetherianity ofO(Z) later.
Before going into the proof of Theorem 10.5, we deduce the following corollary.
Corollary10.7.Assume that parts (1) and (3) of Theorem 10.5 hold in dimensionn. Then
the functor taking any compact SteinZ‚äÇC n to the category of finitely presentedO(Z)-modules
defines a sheaf of categories (for the finite cover topology). It is naturally a subsheaf ofZ7‚Üí
Dpc,‚â•0(O(Z)).
Proof.Over a coherent ring, any finitely presented module admits a resolution that is finite
free in each degree, thus giving a full embedding of Coh(O(Z)) intoD pc,‚â•0(O(Z)). AsO(Z)‚Üí
O(Z ‚Ä≤) is flat wheneverZ ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇZis compact Stein, this defines a subpresheaf. It automatically satisfies
the fully faithfulness part of the sheaf axiom. For essential surjectivity, note that if one glues objects
in degree 0, the resulting glued object lives in homological degrees‚â§0 (as it is computed by a
Cech complex). But by Corollary 10.2, it also lives in degrees‚â•0, so it still lives in degree 0. But
the objects ofD pc,‚â•0(O(Z)) that are concentrated in degree 0 are precisely the finitely presented
O(Z)-modules. ‚ñ°
Remark10.8.On a coherent scheme, the usual way to think about coherent sheaves is that on
affines, they correspond to finitely presented modules, and in general one glues such. The previous
corollary says that one can also think of coherent sheaves in complex-analytic geometry in this way,
if one regards compact Stein subsets as the analogues of affine subsets. Together with Remark 10.6,
one can even pretend to be on a noetherian scheme.
Before we start the proof, we recall the Weierstra√ü Preparation Theorem.
Theorem10.9 (Weierstra√ü Preparation).LetO 0 =O({(0, . . . ,0})be the ring of germs of
holomorphic functions at the origin(0, . . . ,0)‚ààC n. Letf‚àà O 0 be such that
f(X 1,0, . . . ,0)Ã∏= 0.
Letkbe the order of vanishing off(X 1,0, . . . ,0)atX 1 = 0. Then one can uniquely write
f=gu
whereu‚àà O 0 is invertible andg‚àà O 0 is a monic polynomial inX 1 of degreekwhose coefficients
are germs of holomorphic functions inX 2, . . . , Xn vanishing at the origin.
96 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Proof.Inside formal power series, it is easy to solve for the coefficients ofganduinductively,
arguing modulo powers of (X 2, . . . , Xn). More precisely, we will find inductivelyg i andu i so that
f‚àíg iui ‚àà(X 2, . . . , Xn)iO0. We may start withg 1 =X k
1 andu 1 =f(X 1,0, . . . ,0)/X k
1 . Giveng i
andu i, we first compute
(f‚àíg iui)u‚àí1
1 ‚àà(X 2, . . . , Xn)iO0,
leth i be the part of the power series whereX 1 appears to a power less thank, and then set
gi+1 =g i +h i. Then moduloX k
1 , we have
f‚àíg i+1ui =f‚àíg iui ‚àí(f‚àíg iui)u‚àí1
1 ui = (f‚àíg iui)(1‚àíu ‚àí1
1 ui)‚àà(X 2, . . . , Xn)i+1.
Thus modulo (X 2, . . . , Xn)i+1, we have
f‚àíg i+1ui ‚â°X k
1 vi
for somev i ‚àà(X 2, . . . , Xn)iO0, and we setu i+1 =u i +v i. Then modulo (X 2, . . . , Xn)i+1, we have
f‚àíg i+1ui+1 =f‚àíg i+1ui ‚àíg i+1vi ‚â°X k
1 vi ‚àíg i+1vi ‚â°(X k
1 ‚àíg i+1)vn ‚â°0,
giving the desired induction step. Uniqueness can also easily be shown.
One possibility to conclude is now to analyze this algorithm and deduce bounds on the coef-
ficients. Let us give an abstract argument. We argue by induction onn. Using this induction,
we already know thatf(X 1, . . . , Xn‚àí1,0) admits the desired factorization, or equivalently that
g(X1, . . . , Xn‚àí1,0) andu(X 1, . . . , Xn‚àí1,0) have the desired growth of coefficients. Thus, the map
k‚àí1M
j=0
O‚Ä≤
0 ¬∑X j
1 ‚Üí O0/f
is an isomorphism after quotienting byX n. But this can be approximated by a similar map of
Banach algebras, where again it is an isomorphism after quotienting byX n. But by Banach‚Äôs Open
Mapping Theorem, this means that the inverse ofX n has bounded norm, and in particular the
map becomes an isomorphism after localizing to the locus where|X n|is sufficiently small. But this
gives the desired result. 13 ‚ñ°
Now we can prove the finiteness results on rings of holomorphic functions.
Proof of Theorem 10.5.We argue by induction onn. Forn= 0, there is nothing to prove.
Now assume the result in dimensionn‚àí1. LetZ ‚Ä≤ be any compact subset ofC n that containsZ
in its interior, and letI ‚Ä≤ be any ideal ofO(Z ‚Ä≤). LetI=I ‚Ä≤O(Z) andM=O(Z)/I. We claim that
there is a finite cover ofZbyZ i such that the (non-derived!) base changesM i =M‚äó O(Z) O(Zi)
lie inD pc,‚â•0(O(Zi)), and have the property that all further base changesM i ‚äóL
<p,O(Zi) O(Z ‚Ä≤
i) are
concentrated in degree 0. To show this, it suffices to find a cover ofZbyZ i such that each
Mi admits a (possibly infinite) resolution by finite freeO(Z i)-modules and has the property that
Mi ‚äóL
<p,O(Zi) Oz is concentrated in degree 0 for allz‚ààZ i. To find such a cover, we can argue
locally around a pointz‚ààZ. We can assumez= 0‚ààC n is the origin. We can also assume that
bothZandZ ‚Ä≤ are polydiscs. IfI= 0, there is nothing to show. Otherwise, we find some nonzero
f‚ààI, and after shrinkingZand changing coordinates, we can apply Theorem 10.9 to assume that
it is a monic polynomial inX 1. In that caseO(Z)/fis finite free over a similar polydiscWone
dimension lower. By the theorem in one dimension lower, it follows thatO(Z)/Iis pseudocoherent
13This argument is nicely presented in a paper of Ullrich, [Ull99].
10. LECTURE X: COHERENT SHEAVES, II 97
overO(W), hence overO(W)[X 1], and then also overO(Z) (as any resolution overO(W)[X 1] base
changes to a resolution over the idempotent liquidO(W)[X 1]-algebraO(Z)). Moreover, all further
base changes along compact Stein subsetsW ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇWstay in degree 0, and in particular this is true
for all stalks. But asO(Z)/fis finite overO(W), this also recovers (up to direct summands) all
the stalks overZ.
Now given such a cover ofZbyZ i‚Äôs, theM i actually define a descent datum inDpc,‚â•0, and hence
glue back to someM ‚Ä≤ ‚àà D pc,‚â•0(O(Z)), that is necessarily concentrated in degree 0, i.e. just aO(Z)-
module. Being pseudocoherent, it is in particular finitely presented. Also,M i =M ‚Ä≤ ‚äóL
O(Z) O(Zi)
is also the derived base change, asM ‚Ä≤ is the result of gluing theM i in the setting ofD pc,‚â•0. Now
the cokernel ofM‚ÜíM ‚Ä≤ is a finitely generatedO(Z)-module that vanishes locally, so vanishes by
Lemma 10.3. Thus,M‚ÜíM ‚Ä≤ is surjective. LetK‚äÇMbe the kernel. This is again a finitely
generatedO(Z)-module (as the kernel of a map from a finitely generated module to a finitely
presented module), and using thatM ‚Ä≤ ‚äóL
O(Z) O(Zi) is concentrated in degree 0, one also sees that
it vanishes locally. Thus, alsoK= 0, andM‚ÜíM ‚Ä≤ is an isomorphism. ButM ‚Ä≤ is pseudocoherent,
i.e. has a resolution by finite freeO(Z)-modules, hence so isM=O(Z)/I. This implies in particular
thatIis finitely presented, and hence thatO(Z) is coherent. Moreover,M ‚Ä≤ gives rise to a sheaf that
is concentrated in degree 0, hence so doesM. Thus, for allZ ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇZcompact Stein, the base change
M‚äó L
O(Z) O(Z ‚Ä≤) is concentrated in degree 0. As this is true for all finitely presentedM=O(Z)/I,
we see thatO(Z)‚Üí O(Z ‚Ä≤) is flat.
At this point, we have proved parts (1), (3) and (4). Part (5) follows directly from Weier-
stra√üpreparation and induction onn. For part (2), consider a maximal idealI‚äÇ O(Z), and let
A=O(Z)/I. By Lemma 10.3, there is somez‚ààZsuch that the base changeA z =O z/IO z is
nonzero. ButO z is local with maximal ideal the kernel of the evaluation atz. Thus, there is a
further quotientA z ‚ÜíC; asIwas maximal, this means it is the kernel of evaluation atz. It is
clear that the complete local ring is a power series ring; in fact, the derived base change
C‚äó L
C[X1,...,Xn] O(Z) =C
asCis a module overO(Z) andO(Z) is idempotent. This means that the regular sequence
(X1 ‚àíz 1, . . . , Xn ‚àíz n) generates the maximal ideal, and then one easily computes the completion.
To show that the completion is flat, we factor it asO(Z)‚Üí O z ‚ÜíC[[X 1 ‚àíz 1, . . . , Xn ‚àíz n]]. The
first map is flat by (3), so it suffices to show that the second map is flat, where it follows from (5).
To show thatO(Z) is flat overC[X 1, . . . , Xn] for allZ, note that for any idealI‚äÇC[X 1, . . . , Xn],
we get a sheafZ7‚Üí O(Z)‚äó L
C[X1,...,Xn] C[X1, . . . , Xn]/I, and to show that this is concentrated in
degree 0, we can check on stalks. These are given byO z ‚äóL
C[X1,...,Xn] C[X1, . . . , Xn]/I. AsO z is
noetherian, the flatness can now be checked on complete local rings, where it is clear (as it agrees
with the complete local rings of the polynomial algebra).
Finally, part (6) follows from (2) and a criterion of Matsumura [Mat80, Theorem 102], using
the derivations ‚àÇ
‚àÇXi
fori= 1, . . . , n, which are ‚Äúorthogonal‚Äù to a system of parameters at each
closed point, by (2). 14 ‚ñ°
14Excellence was proved by Bingener [Bin78, Theorem 1.10] and Scheja‚ÄìStorch [SS72, Satz 8.10].
98 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Appendix to Lecture X: Noetherianity
In this appendix, we discuss some results on the Noetherianity ofO(Z) for compact SteinZ.
The goal is to prove the following theorem of Frisch [Fri67]. 15
Theorem10.10.Assume thatZ‚äÇC n is a compact Stein subset given by finitely many in-
equalities of the form|f(z)| ‚â§1for real-analyticf. ThenO(Z)is noetherian.
Remark10.11.The theorem implies, via excellence, Oka‚Äôs Second and Third Coherence Theo-
rem (as passing to the reduced quotient, and to normalizations, now passes to complete local rings,
and hence also to localizationsO(Z)‚Üí O(Z ‚Ä≤)).
We note that a consequence of this is thatZcan have only finitely many connected compo-
nents. Such basic facts about (closed) semi-analytic sets, as established in [Loj64], usually enter
as ingredients into the proof of Theorem 10.10. The argument below avoids appeal to [Loj64] (but
still starts by proving some simple facts about semi-analytic sets by hand).
First, we note that we can restrict to the real-analytic case. More precisely, we can embed
Z‚äÇC n ‚àº= R2n intoC 2n. Then, given thatO(Z‚äÇC 2n) is noetherian, the mapO(Z‚äÇC n)‚Üí
O(Z‚äÇC 2n) is faithfully flat, 16 and henceO(Z‚äÇC n) is noetherian.
Thus, assume from now on thatZ‚äÇR n. Using a Zariski closed immersion, we can then reduce
to a cubeZ= [‚àí1,1] n ‚äÇR n. We will now argue by induction onn, and work with the algebra
OR(Z) of real-analytic functions onZ(soO(Z) =O R(Z)‚äó R C).
We will use the analogue of Weierstra√ü Preparation in this situation, so we need to discuss
finite algebras overO R([‚àí1,1] n); letAbe such an algebra. The first result we need is the following
lemma on connected components.
Lemma10.12.LetAbe anO R([‚àí1,1] n)-algebra that is finitely presented as a module. Let
0< c <1. Then the image of the map
œÄ0(A(R)√ó [‚àí1,1]n [‚àíc, c]n)‚ÜíœÄ 0(A(R))
is finite.
(Theorem 10.10 in fact implies that the target is finite.)
Proof.We need to see thatA(R) has only finitely many connected components whose image
in [‚àí1,1] n meets a given compact subset contained in the interior (‚àí1,1) n of the cube. This can
be checked locally around points of the interior. We argue by induction onn. After passing to a
quotient by a nilpotent ideal, there is somef‚àà O R([‚àí1,1] n) such that
OR([‚àí1,1] n)[f ‚àí1]‚ÜíA[f ‚àí1]
is finite  ÃÅ etale. In particular, over{fÃ∏= 0} ‚äÇ[‚àí1,1] n, the mapA(R)‚Üí[‚àí1,1] n becomes a finite
covering space. As{fÃ∏= 0}has only finitely many connected components by Lemma 10.13 below,
there are only finitely many connected components ofA(R) meeting the locus wherefÃ∏= 0. Thus,
it suffices to prove the similar result forA/finstead. ButA/flocally admits a finitely presented
projection to ann‚àí1-dimensional cube, so we conclude by induction.‚ñ°
15A simple proof of this was given by Langmann in [Lan77], but we believe that it is incorrect, as the proof
of [Lan77, Lemma 1] seems to work only in the complex-analytic case, but not in the real-analytic case where it is
applied later. The proof we give below fixes Langmann‚Äôs argument.
16By the classification of maximal ideals, it suffices to check flatness; but this can be done on local rings, and
then on complete local rings as the target is noetherian.
APPENDIX TO LECTURE X: NOETHERIANITY 99
Lemma10.13.Letf‚àà O R([‚àí1,1] n). Then
{fÃ∏= 0} ‚äÇ[‚àí1,1] n
has only finitely many connected components.
Proof.By induction, we can assume that this is true for the intersections with all the faces.
It is then enough to prove that{fÃ∏= 0} ‚à©(‚àí1,1) n has only finitely many connected components.
Butfextends to [‚àíC, C] n for someC >1, and if we multiplyfby the hyperplane equations
for all the faces, it is enough to prove that for anyg‚àà O R([‚àíC, C]n), the locus{gÃ∏= 0}has
only finitely many connected components that meet [‚àí1,1] n. But then we can again locally find
a projection to ann‚àí1-dimensional cube so that the locusg= 0 is finite over it. Arguing as in
the previous proof, there is some nonzero functionhon then‚àí1-dimensional cube such that over
the nonvanishing locushÃ∏= 0, the locusg= 0 defines a finite topological cover. In that case, the
locus{gÃ∏= 0, hÃ∏= 0} ‚äÇR√ó {hÃ∏= 0}mapping to{hÃ∏= 0}is, over each connected component, a
finite union of open intervals, and hence has also only finitely many connected components. But
by openness, no connected component of{gÃ∏= 0}can map into{h= 0}.‚ñ°
Coming back to the finiteO R([‚àí1,1] n)-algebraA, we note that inside the corresponding com-
pact Hausdorff spaceA(C) ofC-valued points, we have the closed subspaceA(R)‚äÇA(C) of real
points, giving rise to an idempotentp-liquidA-algebraA R of real-analytic functions onA(R). Note
thatA R is in general far from a finiteO R([‚àí1,1] n)-algebra.
The key step is the following proposition, showing a local finite generation result in the interior
of the cube.
Proposition10.14.Assume thatO R([‚àí1,1] n)is noetherian. LetAbe a finiteO R([‚àí1,1] n)-
algebra and letI‚äÇA R be an ideal. Then there is someŒµ >0such that, denoting
AR
Œµ =A R ‚äóliq
OR([‚àí1,1]n) OR([‚àíŒµ, Œµ]n),
the idealIA R
Œµ is finitely generated.
Proof.We argue by induction onn(noting that the noetherianity assumption for somen
implies it for smallern, by passing to quotients). Passing to a smaller cube around the origin,
we can assume thatA(C) has a unique point above 0 n ‚àà[‚àí1,1] n, and that this point is real. In
particular,
AR
0 =A R ‚äóOR([‚àí1,1]n) OR(0n) =A‚äó OR([‚àí1,1]n) OR(0n)
is the stalk at this point, and is a finiteO R(0n)-algebra, where the latter is noetherian, regular and
excellent. The idealIA R
0 is therefore finitely generated, and at the expense of replacingAby a
quotient by a finitely generated ideal, we can assume thatIA R
0 = 0. The goal is then to show that
IA R
Œµ = 0 for someŒµ >0. Note that asO R([‚àí1,1] n) is noetherian, we can replaceAby its reduction
(arguing modulo powers of the nilradical).
Let eAbe the normalization ofA, which is finite by excellence ofO R([‚àí1,1] n). For any 0< Œµ <1,
the map
œÄ0(Spec(AR
Œµ ‚äóA eA))‚ÜíœÄ 0(Spec(AR ‚äóA eA))
has finite image by Lemma 10.12 (writing eA, as a finiteA-algebra, by adjoining 2 real variables
each algebraic variable (as its real and imaginary part), which are also implicitly added into the
100 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
coordinates of the base cube, which can be taken large in these directions).17 TakingŒµsmall enough,
it then follows that the image agrees with the image of
œÄ0(Spec(AR
0 ‚äóA eA))‚ÜíœÄ 0(Spec(AR ‚äóA eA)).
But now the kernel ofA R ‚ÜíA R
0 is contained in the kernel ofA R ‚äóA eA‚ÜíA R
0 ‚äóA eA, and as this
map is flat and the source is normal (as normality passes to analytic localizations, as it can (by
excellence) be checked on complete local rings), any element in the kernel of this map must vanish
on the whole connected components containing Spec(A R
0 ‚äóA eA). But then it also vanishes on the
image of Spec(A R
Œµ ‚äóA eA), and hence the kernel ofA R ‚äóA eA‚ÜíA R
0 ‚äóA eAis equal to the kernel of
AR ‚äóA eA‚ÜíA R
Œµ ‚äóA eA. This implies thatIA R
Œµ ‚äóA eA= 0 and hence alsoIA R
Œµ = 0.‚ñ°
Finally, we can prove [Lan77, Lemma 1], at least assuming the inductive hypothesis.
Lemma10.15.Assume thatO R([‚àí1,1] n)is noetherian. LetI‚äÇ O R([‚àí1,1] n+1)be any ideal.
Then for0< c <1, the idealIO R([‚àíc, c]n+1)ofO R([‚àíc, c]n+1)is finitely generated.
Proof.Using Lemma 10.3, it is enough to prove that any point in the interior of (‚àí1,1) n+1
admits a closed neighborhoodZsuch thatIO R(Z) is finitely generated. IfI= 0, there is nothing
to prove, so take some nonzerof‚ààI. Then locally around any point, we can find a finite projection
to ann-dimensional cube, reducing us to Proposition 10.14.‚ñ°
Now the rest of the proof of Theorem 10.10 is as in [Lan77]. Namely, assume by induction
thatO R([‚àí1,1] n) is noetherian, and consider any sequencef 0, f1, . . . ,‚àà O R([‚àí1,1] n+1) generating
an idealI. By induction, for every faceZof the cube,O R(Z) is noetherian: Indeed, if the
face is given by sayx 1 = 1, then itsx 1 ‚àí1-adic completion isO R([‚àí1,1] n)[[x1 ‚àí1]], which is
noetherian by induction, and faithfully flat overO R(Z). In particular, there is someNsuch that
(f0, . . . , fN)OR(Z) =IO R(Z) for all facesZof the cube. For everyN ‚Ä≤ > N, the quotient
(f0, . . . , fN ‚Ä≤)/(f0, . . . , fN)‚äÇ O R([‚àí1,1] n+1)/(f0, . . . , fN)
defines a coherent sheaf whose support is a compact subset of (‚àí1,1) n. Note that
OR([‚àí1,1] n+1)/(f0, . . . , fN)
extends to a coherent sheaf on a small neighborhood [‚àí1‚àíŒµ,1 +Œµ] n+1 of [‚àí1,1] n (as allf 0, . . . , fN
extend to a small neighborhood), and so do these coherent subsheaves (f 0, . . . , fN ‚Ä≤)/(f0, . . . , fN)
(via extending by zero outside [‚àí1,1] n+1). Each of them thus defines a coherent submodule of
OR([‚àí1‚àíŒµ,1 +Œµ] n+1)/(f0, . . . , fN), and in particular an ideal ofO R([‚àí1‚àíŒµ,1 +Œµ] n+1) via taking
the preimage. Let eI‚äÇ O R([‚àí1‚àíŒµ,1 +Œµ] n+1) be their union. By construction, one hasI=
eIO R([‚àí1,1] n+1). We conclude with Lemma 10.15.
17Here, the connected components of the spectrum can also be understood in terms of connected components of
the maximal spectrum, with its archimedean topology.
11. LECTURE XI: COMPLEX ANALYTIC SPACES 101
11. Lecture XI: Complex analytic spaces
The goal in this lecture will be to formally introduce a category of complex analytic spaces in
which we will work. But first we want to add some small things to the discussion of the previous
lecture. Recall from the previous lecture the following:
(1) For every compact SteinK‚äÇC n, the ringO(K)(‚àó) is coherent, and in particular an object
inD(Mod O(K)(‚àó)) is pseudocompact if and only if it is homologically bounded below and
each homology group is finitely presented as anO(K)(‚àó)-module. (In fact, in the appendix
we also saw that for enoughK, including closed polydisks, the ringO(K)(‚àó) is even
noetherian, so for theseKwe can replace ‚Äúfinitely presented‚Äù by ‚Äúfinitely generated‚Äù.)
(2) The associationK7‚Üí D pc(O(K)(‚àó)) satisfies descent for the topology of finite covers of
compact Steins.
(3) ForK ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇK, the restriction mapO(K)(‚àó)‚Üí O(K ‚Ä≤)(‚àó) is flat.
It follows that assigning to everyKthe category of finitely presentedO(K)(‚àó)-modules is a
sheaf of abelian categories with respect to the topology of finite covers. We would now like prove
the following ‚Äúhygienic‚Äù properties of this sheaf of abelian categories.
Proposition11.1.SupposeKis a compact Stein inC n. Then:
(1) For any finitely presentedO(K)-moduleM, we have thatM, viewed as an underlying
object ofLiq p, is a DNF space (see Lecture VIII). In particularMis quasi-separated.
(2) For anyO(K)(‚àó)-moduleM, we have thatO(K)‚äó L
O(K)(‚àó) M‚àà D(Liq p)lives in degree0.
The claim in (2) is a bit subtle: we know thatD(O(K)(‚àó)) embeds fully faithfully into
D(ModO(K)(Liqp)) viaM7‚Üí O(K)‚äó L
O(K)(‚àó) Mfor formal reasons (the unit object inD(Mod O(K)(Liqp))
is compact and has endomorphism ringO(K)(‚àó)), but there‚Äôs nothing formal guaranteeing that
this functor ist-exact. Nonetheless, that‚Äôs what (2) claims. Note that this property, combined
with flatness ofC[x 1, . . . , xn](‚àó)‚Üí O(K)(‚àó), was used above in Lemma 6.8 in the calculation of
the structure sheaf of the analytification of a finite typeC-algebra.
Proof.For (1), note that the DNF spaces are exactly the basic nuclear objects concentrated in
degree 0 which are quasi-separated. (Indeed, without being quasi-separated, we know from Theorem
8.15 that we have a quotient of DNF spaces; but by Lemma 8.14 a quasiseparated quotient of DNF
spaces is DNF.) So it suffices to show thatMis basic nuclear and quasi-separated. ForM=O(K),
basic nuclearity is Proposition 9.13, and generalM‚Äôs are a quotient of a finite direct sum of such,
which is still basic nuclear. Thus, it remains to see thatMis quasiseparated. We can embedM
into a product of copies of the local rings atx‚ààK. It suffices to see that these are qs, as a product
of qs spaces is qs, and a subobject of a qs space is qs. Thus, it suffices to show that any finitely
generated moduleMover the local ringO Cn,x is qs, or equivalently DNF. Because an extension of
DNF spaces is DNF (Lemma 8.14), we can use induction to reduce to the case of one generator.
ThenM=O Cn,x/Ifor an idealI. IfI= 0, we‚Äôre done by the explicit formula for the local
ring; otherwise there is 0Ã∏=f‚ààI, and after a linear change of coordinates we can use Weierstra√ü
preparation to conclude thatO Cn,x/fis finite free over a local ring in one dimension lower. Then
OCn,x/Iis finitely generated over a local ring in one dimension lower, so we conclude by induction
on the dimension.
For (2), by writing everyO(K)(‚àó)-module as a filtered colimit of finitely presented ones, we
reduce to the case whenMis finitely presented. Then by coherence ofO(K)(‚àó), we can resolve
102 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Mby a complex of finite freeO(K)(‚àó)-modules. It follows thatO(K)‚äó L
O(K)(‚àó) Mis calculated by
a complex where each term is a finite direct sum of copies ofO(K). These terms are then DNF
spaces, and by construction this complex has the property that, after applying (‚àí)(‚àó), it is acyclic
in positive degrees. We want to see that the same holds also before applying (‚àí)(‚àó). But this is a
consequence of the following lemma.‚ñ°
Lemma11.2.SupposeC ‚Ä¢ is a complex of DNF spaces. IfC ‚Ä¢(‚àó)is exact, thenC ‚Ä¢ is exact.
Proof.Considering the kernels of the differentials, which are also DNF spaces by Lemma 8.14,
it suffices to show that iff:V‚ÜíWis a map of DNF spaces which is surjective on applying‚àí(‚àó),
thenfis surjective. For that, we will only use thatW= S
i Wi is a filtered union of Banach
spaces andV= S
n Kn is a countable union of compact Hausdorff spaces. Indeed, fornandm,
consider the closed subspacef(K n)‚à©W m ‚äÇW m. Fixingm, the union over allnof these subsets is
set-theoretically equal toW m by hypothesis. By the Baire category theorem, it follows that one of
these subsets has non-empty interior. Thus there exists an open ball inW m which is contained in
somef(K n). Translating and scaling, we see that every open ball inW m is contained in the image
of a compact subset ofV. Thus, for allm, every compact subset ofW m is contained in the image
of a compact subset ofV. Every compact subset ofWis contained inW m for somem, so this gives
the conclusion. ‚ñ°
Remark11.3.Recall that the basic nuclear objects inD(Liq p) are exactly those which can be
represented by a complex of DNF spaces. Thus, another interpretation of the above lemma is that
the functor
X7‚ÜíX(‚àó)
from basic nuclears toD(C) is conservative, i.e. detects isomorphisms.
Now we turn to our main task, a definition of complex analytic space. Classically, the definition
is based on the formalism of locally ringed spaces. More precisely, a complex analytic space is a
locally ringed space (X,O X) which is locally isomorphic to one of the following form: take the
following data:
(1) An open polydiskD n ‚äÇC n, which may as well be the unit polydisk;
(2) Finitely many holomorphic functionsf 1, . . . , fm ‚àà O(D n),
and produce the following locally ringed space:
(1)X=Z(f 1, . . . , fm)‚äÇD n;
(2)O X =O Dn/(f1, . . . , fm), a sheaf of rings onD n supported onXwhich therefore corre-
sponds to a sheaf of rings onX.
The definition we give will be more general, in two different directions:
(1) We want to allow (certain) compact Stein subsetsK‚äÇC n also to count as complex
analytic spaces, meaning in some sense we want to allow our complex analytic spaces to
have ‚Äúboundaries‚Äù. This makes for more convenient reduction to algebra, as the rings of
functionsO(K) have nice finiteness properties like those proved in the previous lectures.
(2) We want to allow derived structure sheaves as well, in order to have clean formulations of
base-change theorems.
Except for this derived nonsense and the fact that we are in the complex analytic context, we
essentially follow the set-up of Grosse-Kl Ãà onne‚Äôs theory ofdagger spaces, [GK00], in terms of which
local models we allow.
11. LECTURE XI: COMPLEX ANALYTIC SPACES 103
Definition11.4.A commutative algebraAinD ‚â•0(Liqp) is calledaffinoidif there exists an
n‚â•0 and a homomorphism
O(D
n
)‚ÜíA
of commutative algebras inD ‚â•0(Liqp), such thatA‚àà D pc(O(D
n
)) as an underlyingO( D
n
)-module
inD(Liq p).
In other words, by the noetherianness ofO( D
n
) proved in the appendix to the previous lecture,
an affinoid algebra is a connective algebra over the ringO( D
n
) of holomoprhic fuctions on some
closed polydisk, such that each homology group is finitely generated as a module overO( D
n
).
The following will be useful for reducing some questions aboutAtoH 0A.
Lemma11.5.Letd‚â•0, letBbe an idempotentC[x 1, . . . , xd]-algebra inD ‚â•0(Liqp), and letA
be a commutative algebra object inD ‚â•0(Liqp). Then the map
Hom(B, A)‚ÜíHom(B, H 0A)
is a bijection onœÄ 0. Here we take homomorphisms of commutative algebra objects inD ‚â•0(Liqp).
Proof.Because of idempotency, Hom(O(K),‚àí) is a full sub-anima of Hom(C[x 1, . . . , xd],‚àí).
But the latter identifies with (‚àí) d sinceC[x 1, . . . , xd] is free ondgenerators. 18 AsA d ‚ÜíH 0Ad is
evidently a bijection onœÄ 0, we reduce to showing the following: given a mapf:C[x 1, . . . , xd]‚ÜíA,
we have thatffactors throughBif and only if the compositionC[x 1, . . . , xd]‚ÜíA‚ÜíH 0Afactors
throughB. ‚ÄúOnly if‚Äù is obvious. For ‚Äúif‚Äù, by idempotency it suffices to show thatA, viewed
as anC[x 1, . . . , xd]-module, lies in the full subcategory ofB-modules. Again by idempotency the
collection ofB-modules is closed under limits and colimits, so we reduce to the claim thatH iAis
anB-module for anyi, which follows from the hypothesis asH iAis a module overH 0A.‚ñ°
For our definition of complex analytic space, instead of using the standard formalism of locally
ringed space, we will use the formalism ofcategorified localediscussed in Lecture VII. Recall that
a categorified locale is a triple
(X, C, f:S(C)‚ÜíX)
whereXis a locale,Cis a cocomplete closed symmetric monoidal stable‚àû-category, andfis a
map of locales. Essentially, the idea is this: the localeS(C) is much too huge to work with in its
entirety, so we use a well-chosen mapfto a simpler localeXin order to single out part of the
‚Äúgeometry‚Äù ofC.
Our next task will be to assign a canonical categorified locale to any affinoid algebraA, where
the categoryCwill be
CA = ModA(D(Liqp)),
and the locale will be the topological space
XA = Hom(A(‚àó),C) =M Berk((H0A)(‚àó)),
following the pattern from Lecture V.
18Here we implicitly use thatChas characteristic zero: otherwise the free commutative algebra inD ‚â•0(Liqp)
would have contributions from the derived functors of Œ£ n-coinvariants.
104 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
We will denote the localeS(C A) also just byS(A). Recall from Lecture V that for a liquid ring
Aandf‚ààA(‚àó), there is a native notion of ‚Äúfbeing analytic‚Äù: it means that
S(A) =
[
r
{|f|< r},
where the open subsets{|f|< r}are base-changed from defining idempotent algebras overC[T]
via the homomorphismC[T]‚ÜíAclassifyingf. It is actually equivalent to say that there exists an
c >0 for which
S(A) ={|f| ‚â§c}.
Indeed, since the unit object inC A is compact, the localeS(A) is quasicompact.
For affinoid rings, it turns out that every element is analytic.
Lemma11.6.LetAbe an affinoid algebra, and letf‚ààA(‚àó). Then
S(A) =
[
r
{|f|< r},
or equivalently there existsc >0such that
S(A) ={|f| ‚â§c}.
Proof.By Lemma 11.5, we can assumeA=H 0A. Then by definitionAis a finite algebra
over someO( D
n
). In particular, by the noetherian property, anyf‚ààAis the root of a monic
polynomial with coefficients inO( D
n
). By Lemma 6.11, this reduces us toA=O( D
n
) itself. But
if we let
f=
X
ai1,...,inzi1
1 . . . zin
n ,
then takingc= P |ai1,...,in|we can factor
C[T]
T7‚Üíf
‚àí ‚Üí O(D
n
)
throughO(c¬∑ D) by substitution of power series.‚ñ°
As a corollary, we note the following, showing in particular that affinoid algebras in degree 0
are also the same thing as quotients of rings of the formO( D
n
) by ideals:
Lemma11.7.SupposeAis affinoid. Then there exists ann‚â•0and a homomorphism
O(D
n
)‚ÜíA
such thatA‚àà D pc(O(D
n
))and the induced map
O(D
n
)‚ÜÝH 0A
is surjective.
Proof.We start with an arbitraryO( D
n
)‚ÜíAsuch thatA‚àà D pc(O(D
n
)). ThenH 0Ais
finite overO( D
n
), so we can choose finitely many generatorsf 1, . . . , fk. By the previous lemma,
each of these generators is analytic, so we can add them to the presentation, gettingO( D
n+k
)‚ÜíA
surjective onH 0, as desired.‚ñ°
Now we state the result giving the categorified locale structure on an affinoid.
Theorem11.8.SupposeAis an affinoid algebra. Then:
11. LECTURE XI: COMPLEX ANALYTIC SPACES 105
(1) There is a unique map of locales
œÄA :S(A)‚ÜíX A := HomC(A(‚àó),C) = Hom C(H0A(‚àó),C)‚äÇ
Y
f‚àà(H 0A)(‚àó)
C
such that forf‚àà(H 0A)(‚àó), the map to thef-factor in the target is given by
S(A)‚Üí S(C[T],C[T])‚ÜíC,
where the first map is induced by the homomorphismC[T]‚ÜíAclassifyingfand the
second map is from Lecture V.
(2) If we writeH 0A=O( D
n
)/Ifor an idealI, thenX A =Z(I)‚äÇ D
n
, the common zero set
ofIin the closed unit polydisk with its standard Euclidean topology. In particular,X A is
a compact Hausdorff space.
(3) The mapœÄ A is ‚Äúsurjective‚Äù in the sense that for two closed subsetsZ, WofX A, we have
Z‚äÇW‚áîœÄ ‚àí1
A Z‚äÇœÄ ‚àí1
A W.
Proof.Consider part (1). First, the mapS(A)‚Üí S(C[T]) induced byfdoes indeed land in
S(C[T],C[T]): this is a restatement of Lemma 11.6. Then the rest follows as in Lecture V: we need
to see that the mapS(A)‚Üí Q
f‚àà(H 0A)(‚àó) Clands inside the closed subset Hom(A(‚àó),C), but all
the required relations come from polynomial algebras mapping toA, and then it follows from the
material in Lecture V (plus Lemma 11.5 to reduce toH 0A).
For part (2), the claim set-theoretically follows from the description of maximal ideals inO( D
n
)
in the previous lecture. This resulting bijectionX A ‚ÜíZ(I) is continuous because it corresponds to
projection onto theC-factors given by the coordinate functionsx 1, . . . , xn ‚ààH 0A(‚àó). The inverse
is also continuous because everyf‚àà(H 0A)(‚àó) does indeed evaluate to a continuous function
Z(I)‚ÜíC.
For part (3), the direction‚áíholds by definition. For‚áê, letO(Z) be the idempotent algebra
inC A corresponding toZ, andO(W) the idempotent algebra corresponding toW. Thus our
assumption is that there is a mapO(W)‚Üí O(Z). IfxÃ∏‚ààW, thenO({x})‚äó A O(W) = 0, hence
O({x})‚äó A O(Z) = 0. But ifx‚ààZthen we have a homomorphismO(Z)‚Üí O({x}). To get a
contradiction and thereby finish the proof, we therefore need to check thatO({x})Ã∏= 0 for any
x‚ààX A. But indeed it has a homomorphism toCgiven by evaluation atx.‚ñ°
We have just assigned a categorical locale (X A, CA, œÄA :S(A)‚ÜíX A) to each affinoidA. In
fact, we will generally not view this as a bare categorified locale, but rather as a categorified locale
over the base categorified locale
(‚àó,D(Liq p)).
With this extra structure, we have:
Corollary11.9.The assignmentA7‚Üí(X A, CA, œÄA)defines a fully faithful contravariant
functor from the‚àû-category of affinoid algebras to the‚àû-category of categorified locales over
(‚àó,D(Liq p)).
Proof.The first bit of data in a map of such categorified locales (X B, CB, œÄB)‚Üí(X A, CA, œÄA)
is a symmetric monoidal colimit-preserving functor
CA ‚ÜíC B.
106 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Taking into account our base categorified locale, this map should be linear over the base category
D(Liqp). Certainly, given a homomorphismA‚ÜíBwe get such a functor by relative tensor product.
Conversely, considering endomorphisms of the unit objects we get a homomorphismA‚ÜíBfrom
any such functorC A ‚ÜíC B. These two associations are mutually inverse by [Lur17, Corollary
4.8.5.21].
Moreover, the constructionA7‚Üí(X A, CA, œÄA) is evidently functorial. So to conclude it suffices
to show that the map of localesX B ‚ÜíX A completing the data of a map of categorified locales is
uniquely determined by the functorC A ‚ÜíC B. But this follows from part (3) of the theorem.‚ñ°
Remark11.10.It seems that in the categorified locale picture, in contrast to the locally ringed
space picture, there is automatically a tighter relation between the algebra of the category and the
topology of the locale. This means that there is no analog of the usual technical annoyance that
one needs to impose an at first sight slightly obscure ‚Äúlocality‚Äù condition on the straightforward
notion of a map of ringed spaces when defining a map of schemes.
Example11.11.Given two closed polydisks D
n
and D
m
, maps of the corresponding categorified
locales are the same as holomorphic maps D
n
‚Üí D
m
in the usual sense, i.e. we give anm-tuple of
elements ofO( D
n
) such that the induced map
D
n
‚ÜíC m
lands inside D
m
.
Let us also treat fiber products.
Proposition11.12.IfB‚ÜêA‚ÜíCare maps of affinoid algebras as indicated, thenB‚äó A C
is also affinoid, where we use the derived relative tensor product inp-liquid vector spaces overC.
For the associated topological spaces we have
XB‚äóAC =X B √óXA XC,
and we also get a fiber product in the‚àû-category of categorified locales.
Proof.Let‚Äôs first consider the claim about affinoids being closed under relative tensor prod-
ucts. WritingAas pseudocompact over someO( D
n
) and using that a composition of pseudocompact
maps is pseudocompact, we reduce toA=O( D
n
). Then by idempotency it suffices to show the
analogous claim withA=C[x 1, . . . , xn]. But then if we choose presentations forBandCas in
Lemma 11.7, meaning we get pseudocompact mapsO( D
m
)‚ÜíBandO( D
p
)‚ÜíBwhich are sur-
jective onH 0, then we see that the mapsC[x 1, . . . , xn]‚ÜíBandC[x 1, . . . , xn]‚ÜíClift to maps
C[x1, . . . , xn]‚Üí O( D
m
) andC[x 1, . . . , xn]‚Üí O( D
p
), letting us reduce to showing that
O(D
m
)‚äó C[x1,...,xn] O(D
p
)
is affinoid. But we can rewrite this as

O(D
m
)‚äó O( D
p
)

‚äóC[x1,...,xn;x‚Ä≤
1,...x‚Ä≤n] C[x1, . . . , xn],
and then we conclude using pseudocompactness (in fact compactness) of the surjection
C[x1, . . . , xn;x ‚Ä≤
1, . . . x‚Ä≤
n]‚ÜíC[x 1, . . . , xn].
For the claim about topological spaces, recall that
XA = Hom(H0A(‚àó),C)
11. LECTURE XI: COMPLEX ANALYTIC SPACES 107
with a natural topology which we proved to be compact Hausdorff in Theorem 11.8. Because a
bijective continuous map of compact Hausdorff spaces is a homeomorphism, we can check the claim
set-theoretically. But then using the universal property of relative tensor product, it suffices to
show that
Hom(H0A(‚àó),C) = Hom(H 0A,C),
i.e. the homomorphisms of condensedC-algebrasH 0A‚ÜíCare in bijection with the homomor-
phisms of discreteC-algebrasH 0A(‚àó)‚ÜíCvia applying (‚àí)(‚àó). The map is injective becauseH 0A
is quasiseparated (Lemma 11.1), and the map is surjective because we classified all the homomor-
phismsH 0A(‚àó)‚ÜíC: they all come from evaluations at points ofZ(I), and these evaluations also
define homomorphismsH 0A‚ÜíC. The final claim about pullbacks of categorical locales follows by
combining the two previous claims.‚ñ°
Using this one can see that the notion of affinoid is rather robust. In fact, though the definition
of affinoid is based only on one kind of compact Stein, namely closed polydisks, there are many
other compact Steins which also turn out to be affinoid. For example, ifAis affinoid andf‚ààA,
then for allr >0 the closed sub-categorified locales ofX A defined by
{|f| ‚â§r},{|f| ‚â•r}
are also (the categorified locales associated to) affinoids. Indeed, we can get to{|f| ‚â§r}by first
taking the product withr¬∑ D(i.e., on the level of affinoids, adjoining a variableTwith|T| ‚â§r), and
then passing to the ‚ÄúZariski-closed subset‚Äù given on the level of affinoids by modding outT‚àíf;
and for the second one we can take the product withr ‚àí1 ¬∑ Dand then mod out byT f‚àí1. Then
also, ifgis invertible we can impose
|f| ‚â§ |g|
and still remain affinoid, by imposing|f /g| ‚â§1. By the above result on fiber products, we can also
take finite intersections of affinoids and we still get affinoids, so we can also simultaneously impose
finitely many such inequalities. Then when we do this, we get more functions to play with, and so
on.
W arning11.13.Be careful to distinguish two ways of ‚Äúsettingfequal to 0‚Äù, given an affinoid
Aandf‚ààA. One is by considering the closed subset{|f| ‚â§0}in the locale picture, and the other
is by modding out byfon the level of affinoids, passing fromAtoA/(f). The first corresponds to
the idempotentA-algebra given by ‚Äúgerms of functions in neighborhood ofZ(f)‚Äù. The second does
notcorrespond to an idempotent algebra: althoughA/(f) is of course idempotent overAwith the
underived tensor product, it is not idempotent with the derived tensor product, which is the one
we have to use to get the locale picture to work.
We‚Äôve already gotten used to the idea that, in this locale picture, Zariski opens are actually
closed; now we have to get used to the idea that Zariski closed subsets are not really closed subsets
(nor are they open subsets).
Finally, let us give the definition of complex analytic space we‚Äôll use.
Definition11.14.A (generalized) complex analytic space is a categorified locale over (‚àó,D(Liq p))
which is locally (in the sense of open subsets) isomorphic to an open subset of the categorified locale
over (‚àó,D(Liq p)) associated to an affinoidA.
108 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
The affinoids in degree zero are exactly those of the form
A=O( D
n
)/I
for some idealI(automatically finitely generated, by noetherianness). For an example of an open
subset of the corresponding categorified locale, we can take the intersection with theopenpolydisk.
If we only consider those generalized complex analytic spaces which are locally isomorphic to such a
local model, we get an equivalent category to the usual category of complex analytic spaces. (This
local model is slightly less general than the usual local model for complex analytic spaces, because
we require that the generators of our ideal actually come by restriction from holomorphic functions
on theclosedpolydisk. But once we globalize this doesn‚Äôt matter, because any open polydiskDis
covered by smaller open polydisks whose closures still lie insideD.)
Exercise 1.LetAbe an affinoid andx‚ààX A be a point of the interior. Show that, potentially
after shrinkingAto an affinoid neighborhood ofx, we can find ann‚â•0 and a pseudocoherent
homomorphismœÜ:O( D
n
)‚ÜíA(as in the definition of affinoid) such thatœÜisinjective. (This is
an analog of the Noether normalization theorem.)
Exercise 2.LetAbe an affinoid andx‚ààX A be a point of the interior. Using the previous
exercise, show that the topological dimension ofX A atxidentifies with the Krull dimension of the
ringH 0(Ax)(‚àó), whereA x is the idempotent algebra corresponding to the closed subset{x} ‚äÇX A.
12. LECTURE XII: PROPER PUSHFORWARD 109
12. Lecture XII: Proper pushforward
Picking up from the previous lecture, we discuss the notion of (generalized) complex analytic
space. Recall the definition: a complex analytic space is a categorified locale over (‚àó,D(Liq p))
which is locally isomorphic to an open subset of the categorified localeM(A) over (‚àó,D(Liq p))
associated to an affinoidA. Recall that this categorified locale is the triple
(M(A), CA, œÄA)
whereC A = ModA(D(Liqp)), Spa(A) = HomC(A(‚àó),C) (=Z(I)‚äÇ Dn ifH 0A=O( Dn)/I), and
œÄA :S(C A)‚Üí M(A)
is determined by the fact that iff‚ààA(‚àó), then the open subsets{|f|<1},{|f|>1} ‚äÇ M(A) pull
back to the corresponding open subsets ofS(C A), defined by base-change from the open subsets
{|T|<1},{|T|>1}inS(C[T]) constructed in Lecture V.
We will generally abuse notation and refer to a categorified locale (X, C, œÄ) just byX, with
the rest of the data being implicit. We will also use the phrase ‚Äúaffinoid‚Äù to refer to a categorified
locale over (‚àó,D(Liq p)) isomorphic to one of the formM(A).
In general, we can study complex analytic spaces by reduction to affinoids via a two step process:
(1) First, reduce a general complex analytic space to a quasi-affinoid complex analytic space,
i.e. one which is isomorphic to an open subset of an affinoid. This is done by working
locally.
(2) Second, given a quasi-affinoidU, we can reduce to affinoids in either of two ways: first,
choose an ambient affinoidXin whichUis an open subset; or second, use the fact that a
quasi-affinoidUis indeed locally affinoid in the following sense: there is a closed cover of
Uby affinoids which is refined by an open cover. (This follows from the fact that closed
polydisks give a neighborhood basis of any pointx‚ààSpa(A).)
Let‚Äôs give an example of this kind of reduction in action.
Proposition12.1.LetX
f
‚ÜíZ
g
‚ÜêYbe maps of complex analytic spaces as indicated. Then
the pullbackX√ó Z Yexists in the‚àû-category of categorified locales and is itself a complex analytic
space, in particular giving a pullback in the‚àû-category of complex analytic spaces. The forgetful
functor to topological spaces also preserves this pullback.
Proof.In the case whereX, Y, Zare all affinoid, we saw this in the previous lecture; in that
caseX√ó Z Yis also affinoid. Now supposeX, Y, Zare all quasi-affinoid. PuttingZinside an
affinoid, we can reduce to whereZis an affinoid. Finding a cover ofX, Yby closed sub-affinoids
which is refined by an open cover, we reduce to whereX, Yare open subsets of affinoidsX ‚Ä≤, Y ‚Ä≤
which still map toZ. Then the pullbackX√ó Z Yis given by the obvious open subset ofX ‚Ä≤ √óZ Y ‚Ä≤.
In the general case, we work locally onZ, then onXandYto reduce to the quasi-affinoid case.‚ñ°
W arning12.2.It is special to this complex analytic situation that the pullback in complex
analytic spaces is also a pullback in categorified locales (and on underlying topological spaces).
In nonarchimedean geometry or scheme theory, this does not hold: the product topological space
of the spectrum of twok-algebras is generally not fine enough to give the spectrum of the tensor
product. The essential reason for this special behavior of the complex analytic situation is the
Gelfand-Mazur theorem, showing that ‚Äúpoints‚Äù are the same as homomorphisms toC.
110 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
We can also give an abstract formulation of this kind of descent procedure for reducing arbitrary
complex analytic spaces to affinoids.
Proposition12.3.Consider the following two sites:
(1) The‚àû-category of all complex analytic spaces, equipped with the topology of open covers;
(2) The‚àû-category of affinoid complex analytic spaces, equipped with the topology of (finite)
closed covers which can be refined by open covers.
Then the associated‚àû-toposes are equivalent, via restriction from sheaves on the first site to sheaves
on the second site.
In other words, giving a presheaf on the category of all complex analytic spaces which satisfies
descent for open covers is equivalent to giving a presheaf on the category of all affinoid complex
analytic spaces which satisfies descent for those closed covers which can be refined by open covers.
Proof.Consider the intermediate site of all quasiaffinoids with the open cover topology. By
descent, the restriction of sheaves from the site (1) to this site is an equivalence of‚àû-toposes.
On the other hand, inside the site of quasi-affinoids, the affinoids form a basis closed under fiber
products, so the restriction functor on sheaves is an equivalence.‚ñ°
A basic example is the following. By definition, to every complex analytic spaceXis attached
its large‚àû-categoryC X of ‚Äúderived liquid quasicoherent sheaves‚Äù. For the formal reasons explained
in Lecture V, this assignmentX7‚ÜíC X is a sheaf of‚àû-categories for the open cover topology. It
follows that this assignmentX7‚ÜíC X is determined by its restriction to affinoidsM(A), where we
have
CM(A) =C A = ModA(D(Liqp)),
with pullback functoriality coming from relative tensor product along mapsA‚ÜíB. Thus quasico-
herent sheaves are determined on affinoids, where they are simply given by modules over the ring
of functions.
We can also use this descent procedure to single out a nice full subcategory ofC X consisting
of ‚Äúderived coherent‚Äù objects, which on affinoids gives the‚àû-categoryD pc(A) of bounded be-
low complexes ofA(‚àó)-modules which can be resolved by finite free modules, or equivalently by
noetherianness, where each homology group is finitely generated. Recall from Lecture X that this
assignment
A7‚Üí D pc(A)‚äÇMod A(D(Liqp))
satisfies descent for the topology of finite covers of affinoids; in particular it satisfies descent for the
topology of finite covers refined by open covers, so it globalizes to
X7‚Üí D pc(X)
for complex analytic spacesX. To be specific,D pc(X) is the full subcategory ofC X consisting of
thoseF ‚ààC X such thatf ‚àóF ‚àà D pc(A) for any mapf:M(A)‚ÜíXfrom an affinoid. (It is enough
to check this condition on a collection of maps from affinoids which is refined by an open cover of
X.)
Moreover, since the transition mapsA(‚àó)‚ÜíB(‚àó) are flat whenM(B)‚äÇ M(A) is a closed
sub-affinoid of the affinoidX A (10.5), there is a t-structure onD pc(X) defined by gluing the local
t-structures onD pc(A), and in particular we have an abelian category of coherent sheaves, given
by thoseF ‚àà D pc(X) which lie in degree 0.
12. LECTURE XII: PROPER PUSHFORWARD 111
W arning12.4.Although forAaffinoid the big‚àû-categoryC A does have a naturalt-structure
induced from thet-structure on the derived category ofp-liquid vector spaces, the transition maps
CA ‚ÜíC B arenott-exact in general forA‚ÜíBcorresponding to a closed sub-affinoidM(B)‚äÇ
M(A); see the footnote in the proof of Lemma 6.8 for the counterexample. In particular, unlike
with the situation of the smaller categoryD pc(X), there is no way to get a t-structure onC X
by descent from the affinoid case. However, the functorsC A ‚ÜíC B aret-bounded with a bound
depending only on the dimension by the argument in the proof of Proposition 9.17, and this is a
reasonable substitute for the t-structure in some situations.
Next we discuss some properties of maps of complex analytic spaces.
Definition12.5.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a map of complex analytic spaces. We say thatfis
(1) anopen inclusioniffidentifiesXwith (U, C Y (U), œÄ Y |œÄ‚àí1
Y U) for some open subsetU‚äÇY;
(2) aclosed inclusioniffidentifiesXwith (Z,Mod A(CY ), œÄY |œÄ‚àí1
Y Z) for some closed subset
Z‚äÇYwith corresponding idempotent algebraAinC Y ;
(3) aZariski closed immersionif for every affinoidAwith a mapM(A)‚ÜíY, the pullback
M(A)√ó Y Xis represented by an affinoidM(B), and moreover the mapA‚ÜíBsatisfies
the following two conditions: one, it exhibitsBas an object inD pc(A), and two, the
induced mapH 0A‚ÜíH 0Bis surjective;
(4)separatedif the map on underlying topological spaces is separated, i.e. the diagonalX‚Üí
X√ó Y Xis a closed inclusion of topological spaces;
(5)properif the map on underlying topological spaces is proper;
(6)smoothif, locally on both source and target,fis isomorphic to a projection mapY√óD n ‚Üí
Y, whereD n is the open polydisk (open subset of the affinoid Dn given by|z 1|, . . . ,|zn|<1,
where thez i are the coordinate functions);
(7)boundarylessif, locally on both source and target,fis isomorphic to a Zariski closed
immersion followed by a projection mapY√óD n ‚ÜíY, whereD n is the open polydisk.
Note that a boundaryless mapf:X‚Üí ‚àóto point is simply the derived analog of a usual
complex analytic space.
It is easy to see that all of these properties of maps are closed under base-change and composi-
tion, and satisfy descent for the open cover topology on the target. From this and descent we can
deduce the following classification of Zariski closed immersions as ‚Äúrelative spectra‚Äù:
Lemma12.6.LetYbe a complex analytic space. The‚àû-category of Zariski closed immerions
i:X‚ÜíYidentifies with the opposite of the‚àû-category of commutative algebra objectsB‚àà
Dpc(Y) ‚â•0 such that the unit mapO Y ‚ÜíBis surjective onH 0.
Proof.By descent forD pc(Y) together with its t-structure, we reduce to caseY=M(A).
Then to prove the claim we only need to see that ifA‚ÜíBis such thatB‚àà D pc(A) andH 0A‚ÜÝ
H0B, then the same holds after base-change along any map of affinoidsA‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤. But this is
clear. ‚ñ°
Next we discuss separated maps. Recall that separatedness was defined by a condition on the
underlying map of topological spaces. The following lemma shows that this matches with the analog
of the usual definition in scheme theory.
Lemma12.7.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a map of complex analytic spaces. Thenfis separated if and
only if the diagonal‚àÜ f :X‚ÜíX√ó Y Xis a Zariski closed immersion.
112 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Proof.Note that ifiis a Zariski closed immersion of complex analytic spaces, theniis a
closed inclusion on underlying topological spaces. Indeed, we can work locally on the target to
reduce to the affinoid case, when the claim is clear. Since fiber products of complex analytic spaces
commute with the forgetful functor to topological spaces, this shows that if ‚àÜ f is Zariski closed
thenfis separated. Now supposefis separated. To show that ‚àÜ f is a Zariski closed immersion,
we can work locally onYand therefore assumeYis quasi-affinoid. In this case, ‚àÜ Y is a Zariski
closed immersion, as one easily sees by reduction to an affinoid containingYas an open subset,
then further reducing toY= D1 where the claim follows from
O(D2)/(z1 ‚àíz 2) =O( D1).
Then to show ‚àÜ f is a closed immersion, by standard diagrams it is enough to show that ‚àÜ X is a
closed immersion.
Therefore, it suffices to show that if the underlying topological space ofXis Hausdorff, then
‚àÜX :X‚ÜíX√óXis a Zariski closed immersion. We check this locally onX√óX. Let (x 1, x2)‚àà
X√óX. Ifx 1 =x 2 =x, then choose a quasi-affinoid open neighborhoodUofxand useU√óUas an
open neighborhood ofX√óX. The pullback of ‚àÜ X is ‚àÜU, which we‚Äôve already seen to be a Zariski
closed immersion in the previous paragraph. Ifx 1 Ã∏=x 2, choose quasi-affinoidU 1 ‚àãx 1, U2 ‚àãx 2 with
U1 ‚à©U 2 =‚àÖ. Then withU 1 √óU 2 as a neighborhood of (x 1, x2), the pullback of ‚àÜ X is‚àÖ ‚ÜíU 1 √óU 2,
also clearly Zariski closed.‚ñ°
Recall that for a general complex analytic space, the reduction to affinoids goes through this
somewhat annoying two-step process: work open-locally to reduce to quasi-affinoids, then cover a
quasi-affinoid by affinoids with a closed cover (refined by an open cover) to reduce to affinoids. In
particular, the basic affinoids are only locally closed subspaces, not closed subspaces in general.
However, whenX‚Üí ‚àóis separated (i.e.Xis Hausdorff), basic affinoids are closed and we can do
the descent in just one step:
Lemma12.8.LetXbe a Hausdorff complex analytic space. Then:
(1) The collection of affinoid closed subspaces ofXis closed under finite intersection (= fiber
product).
(2) For anyx‚ààX, the affinoid closed neighborhoods ofxform a neighborhood basis for the
topology atx.
(3) IfK‚äÇXis a compact subset, then there is another compact subsetK ‚Ä≤ ‚äÇXsuch that:
(a)K ‚Ä≤ contains an open neighborhood ofK, or in symbolsK‚ãêK ‚Ä≤;
(b)K ‚Ä≤ admits a finite cover by affinoid closed subspaces refined by an open cover.
In particular such aK ‚Ä≤ is itself a complex analytic space.
Proof.Since ‚àÜ X is a closed immersion, it is relatively affinoid, and (1) follows. For (2), we
know for generalXthat the affinoid closed subsets of a quasi-affinoid open neighborhood ofXform
a neighborhood basis; but these are also closed inXbecause they are compact andXis Hausdorff.
And (3) follows immediately from (2).‚ñ°
Now we turn to our main goal: discussion of pushforward functors on these categoriesC X
attached to a complex analytic spaceX. First, a preliminary remark. Let us denote by Œì :C X ‚Üí
D(Liqp) the functor represented byO X ‚ààC X. By descent, we have
Œì(F) = lim ‚Üê ‚àí
f:M(A)‚ÜíX
Œì(f ‚àóF);
12. LECTURE XII: PROPER PUSHFORWARD 113
where on an affinoidM(A) this global sections functor Œì is just the forgetful functor
ModA(D(Liqp))‚Üí D(Liq p).
In the limit above, it also suffices to restrict to thosefgiven by a closed immersion from an affinoid
to some quasi-affinoid open subset ofX, and ifXis Hausdorff, then thanks to the previous lemma
it even suffices to restrict to just closed immersions from affinoids.
Now, coming back to generalX, we can define a functor
sh:C X ‚ÜíSh(X;D(Liq p))
by
(shF)(U) = Œì(U;F | U).
For formal reasons, this promotes to
sh:C X ‚ÜíMod OX(Sh(X;D(Liq p)),
whereO X is the image of the unit object undersh. By Exercise 2 in Lecture VI, this functor is
actually an equivalence whenXis Hausdorff. We will only need the following lemma.
Lemma12.9.LetXbe a Hausdorff complex analytic space andF ‚ààC X. Then for a closed
inclusionf:M(A)‚ÜíXfrom an affinoid, we have
Œì(f ‚àóF) = lim‚àí ‚Üí
U‚äÉM(A)
Œì(F | U)‚ààMod A(D(Liqp))
where the filtered colimit is over open neighborhoods ofM(A)inX. More generally, this holds with
M(A)replaced by any compact subspace ofX, replacingMod A byMod Œì(OX).
Proof.We claim that
lim‚àí ‚Üí
j:U‚äÇX,U‚äÉM(A)
j‚àój‚àóF ‚Üíf ‚àóf ‚àóF
is an isomorphism inC X. Here the transition maps and comparison map come from the fact that
the poset of locally closed subsets ofXembeds fully faithfully contravariantly in the poset of
localizations ofC X, viag ‚àóg‚àó wheregis the inclusion of the locally closed subset, by the material
in Lecture VI.
If this isomorphism claim is known, then we can deduce the claim of the lemma as follows: using
Lemma 12.8, we can shrinkXto assumeXis a finite union of affinoids with affinoid intersections.
Then the global sections functor onC X commutes with colimits, being a finite limit of forgetful
functors from module categories. Whence the claim of the lemma by taking global sections.
Now, to prove the above isomorphism claim, we can replace the filtered colimit over open
neighborhoods ofM(A) by a filtered colimit over arbitrary locally closed subsets containing an open
neighborhood ofM(A), by cofinality of the former in the latter. But then by a similar cofinality
we can replace this with the filtered colimit over aribitrary compact neighborhoods ofM(A).
The intersection of such compact neighborhoods reduces toM(A) itself, so for the corresponding
idempotent algebras inC X we get a filtered colimit. Since for closed subsets the localizationg ‚àóg‚àó
is just given by tensoring with the idempotent algebra, this proves the claim.‚ñ°
Now let us discuss the pushforward functor for a general map of complex analytic spaces.
Proposition12.10.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a map of complex analytic spaces. Then:
(1) the pullback functorf ‚àó :C Y ‚ÜíC X admits a right adjointf ‚àó :C X ‚ÜíC Y ;
114 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
(2) the formation off ‚àó commutes with base-change along open inclusions;
(3) ifYis Hausdorff andi:M(A)‚ÜíYis a closed inclusion from an affinoid, then
i‚àóf‚àóF= lim‚àí ‚Üí
U‚äÉM(A)
Œì(F | f ‚àí1U)‚ààMod A(D(Liqp)),
whereUruns over open neighborhoods ofM(A)inX.
Proof.Sincef ‚àó commutes with colimits, the existence off ‚àó is automatic modulo set-theoretic
issues. In particular, if we work in theŒ∫-condensed context, thenf ‚àó exists. Then (2) and (3) would
give a formula forf ‚àó which in particular shows thatf ‚àó is independent ofŒ∫and therefore gives us
existence off ‚àó without theŒ∫-bound. Thus, for the purposes of proving all three points, we can just
as well assumef ‚àó exists and prove (2) and (3) hold.
For (2), recall from Lecture VI that for an open inclusionj, the pullbackj ‚àó has a left adjoint
j‚ôÆ which commutes with arbitrary base-change. Passing to right adjoints in this statement proves
(2). Then (3) follows from the previous lemma applied tof ‚àóF, plus the base-change claim (2).‚ñ°
Now we can prove the first version of a proper base change theorem.
Theorem12.11.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a proper map of complex analytic spaces. Then the functor
f‚àó :C X ‚ÜíC Y commutes with colimits and arbitrary base-change, and satisfies the projection
formula: forG ‚ààC Y andF ‚ààC X, we have
G ‚äóf ‚àóF ‚àº‚Üíf ‚àó((f ‚àóG)‚äó F).
Proof.Working locally onY, we can assume thatY, hence alsoX, is Hausdorff. Then if
i:M(A)‚ÜíYis a closed inclusion from an affinoid, the open neighborhoodsf ‚àí1Uoff ‚àí1M(A) in
Xare cofinal in all open neighborhoods off ‚àí1M(A), by properness off. Then combining Lemma
12.9 and Proposition 12.10 we deduce thatf ‚àó commutes withi ‚àó. This in turn reduces us to the
case whereY=M(A) is affinoid; similarly, for checking the commutation with base-change, we
only need to consider base-change along maps of affinoids.
But whenYis affinoid, it is compact, soXis also compact, hence a finite union of affinoids
with affinoid intersection by Lemma 12.8. Thus the pushforward fromXtoYis a finite limit of
pushforwards from affinoids mapping toY, letting us reduce to the case whereXis also affinoid.
But then our categories are just categories of modules and pushforwards are forgetful functors, and
the claims follow from obvious base-change properties in that algebraic context.‚ñ°
Our next goal will be to ‚Äúrepair‚Äù the failure of the proper base-change theorem to hold outside
the proper case, by introducing a modification to the functorf ‚àó, denotedf ! :C X ‚ÜíC Y , for which
the conclusion of proper base-change does hold (and withf ! =f ‚àó forfproper). Although in
principle we should define such af ! for any separated mapf:X‚ÜíY(or indeed for any map
whatsoever, as long as we don‚Äôt ask for a natural transformationf ! ‚Üíf ‚àó), for simplicity we will
only consider the case where bothXandYare Hausdorff (in which case any mapf:X‚ÜíYis
separated).
The construction off ! will be by formal extension from the full subcategory ofcompactly
supportedobjectsF ‚ààC X. To define this condition, note that forF ‚ààC X, the set of open subsets
U‚äÇXfor whichF | U = 0 is closed under arbitrary unions, by the sheaf property. Hence there is
a maximalUfor whichF | U = 0. The complement of thisUis a closed subsetZ= SuppFofX
called thesupportofF. Ifi:Z‚ÜíXdenotes the closed inclusion, then it follows thatFlies in
the essential image of the fully faithful functori ‚àó.
12. LECTURE XII: PROPER PUSHFORWARD 115
Definition12.12.LetXbe a Hausdorff complex analytic space. We say that anF ‚ààC X is
compactly supportedif SuppFis compact; or equivalently, ifFis pushed forward from a compact
subset. By Lemma 12.8, this is also equivalent to saying thatFis pushed forward from a compact
closed sub-analytic space, a finite union of affinoids.
The first thing to note is the following.
Lemma12.13.The base-change and projection formula forf ‚àó from the proper base-change
theorem hold for arbitrary mapsf:X‚ÜíYof complex analytic spaces, provided we restrict to the
full subcategory ofC X consisting of those objects whose support is proper overY. (In particular, if
Yis Hausdorff then they hold on compactly supported objects ofC X.) Similarly, the claim aboutf ‚àó
preserving colimits holds if all the terms in the colimit diagram have support in a common subset
ofXwhich is proper overY.
Proof.This follows by the same argument used to prove the proper base-change theorem.
Namely, using the tube lemma we reduce to a base affinoid. Then the support is compact, and
we invoke Lemma 12.8 to place our compact subset inside a finite union of affinoids with affinoid
intersections to conclude.‚ñ°
The technical result we have to prove to get a goodf ! functor by extension from the compactly
supported case is that everyF ‚ààC X is canonically approximated by compactly supported sheaves.
Lemma12.14.LetF ‚ààC X. Then the natural map
lim‚àí ‚ÜíG‚ÜíF
G ‚àº‚Üí F
is an isomorphism, where the colimit runs over all compactly supportedGwith a map toF. More-
over, this colimit is filtered, and the Ind-system giving the diagram on the left is isomorphic both
to the Ind-system giving
lim‚àí ‚Üíi:K‚äÇX
i‚àói!F,
whereKruns over all compact subsets ofX, and to the Ind-system giving
lim‚àí ‚Üíi:V‚äÇX
Fib(F ‚Üíi ‚àói‚àóF),
whereVruns over all closed subsets ofXwhose complement is contained in a compact subset.
All of these Ind-systems are, more precisely, isomorphic objects in the Ind-category of the full
subcategory of compactly supported objects ofC X.
Proof.The indexing‚àû-category for the first colimit is filtered because the collection of com-
pactly supported objects is closed under finite colimits. Note that the indexing poset for the second
colimit maps to the indexing‚àû-category for the first poset by
(i:K‚äÇX)7‚Üí(i ‚àói!F ‚Üí F),
where this is well-defined and functorial becausei ‚àói! is the co-localization functor associated to
K‚äÇX. To prove the Ind-systems are isomorphic, it suffices to show cofinality for this functor
between filtered indexing categories. But indeed, ifG ‚Üí FwithGcompactly supported, then for
K= SuppG, settingj:X\K‚äÇX, we getj ‚àój‚àóG= 0, hence the composition
G ‚Üí F ‚Üíj ‚àój‚àóF
116 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
gets a canonical nullhomotopy, henceG ‚Üí Ffactors through
i‚àói!F= Fib(F ‚Üíj ‚àój‚àóF),
giving the required cofinality.
To show that the last two Ind-systems are isomorphic, note thati ‚àói!F= Fib(F ‚Üíj ‚àój‚àóF), then
use another cofinality argument.
Finally, to show that all of these three colimits giveF, looking at the third colimit, it suffices
to show that
lim‚àí ‚Üíi:V‚äÇX
i‚àói‚àóF= 0,
But the intersection of all suchVis‚àÖ, so for the corresponding idempotent algebras we find that
their colimit is 0, whence the claim.‚ñ°
Before we state the theorem constructing the proper pushforward functors, note that iff:
X‚ÜíYis any map of Hausdorff complex analytic spaces, thenf ‚àó :C X ‚ÜíC Y sends compactly
supported objects to compactly supported objects. Indeed, this follows from compatibility off ‚àó
with pullbacks along open inclusions, together with the fact that the image of a compact subset is
compact.
Theorem12.15.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a map of Hausdorff complex analytic spaces. Then there
is a unique colimit-preserving functor
f! :C X ‚ÜíC Y
equipped with an isomorphism off ! withf ‚àó when restricted to the full subcategory of compactly
supported objects ofC X. Moreover:
(1) There is a unique natural transformationf ! ‚Üíf ‚àó restricting to the given isomorphism
on compactly supported objects ofC X; andf !F ‚àº‚Üíf ‚àóFis an isomorphism more generally
whenSuppFis proper overY.
(2) There is a unique functorial isomorphismG ‚äóf !F ‚âÉf !((f ‚àóG)‚äó F)forG ‚ààC Y ,F ‚àà
CX which restricts to the projection formula isomorphismG ‚äóf ‚àóF ‚âÉf ‚àó((f ‚àóG)‚äó F)for
compactly supportedF.
(3) Given another mapg:Y‚ÜíZof Hausdorff complex analytic spaces, there is a unique
isomorphism(g‚ó¶f) ! ‚âÉg ! ‚ó¶f ! which, on compactly supported objects ofC X, restricts to the
natural isomorphism(g‚ó¶f) ‚àó ‚âÉg ‚àó ‚ó¶f ‚àó.
(4) Given another mapœÜ:Y ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíYof Hausdorff complex analytic spaces, there is a unique
‚Äúbase-change‚Äù isomorphismœÜ ‚àó‚ó¶f! ‚âÉf ‚Ä≤
! ‚ó¶œÜ‚Ä≤‚àó which, on compactly supported objects, restricts
to the natural isomorphismœÜ ‚àó ‚ó¶f ‚àó ‚âÉf ‚Ä≤
‚àó ‚ó¶œÜ ‚Ä≤‚àó from the proper base-change theorem.
(5) Iffis an open inclusion, then there is a unique isomoprhismf ! ‚âÉf ‚ôÆ compatibile with the
natural maps of both of these functors tof ‚àó. (Recallf ‚ôÆ denotes the left adjoint off ‚àó.)
Note that there should also be coherence data relating these different isomorphisms of functors.
We will not need more than a small finite number of these coherences, and what we do need can
be easily produced by hand using the uniqueness claims.
Proof.Lemma 12.14 implies, by the objectwise formula for left Kan extensions, that any
colimit-preserving functor out ofC X identifies with the left Kan extension of its restriction to
the full subcategory of compactly supported objects. More precisely, the‚àû-category of colimit
preserving functors out ofC X is equivalent to that of functors out of the full subcategory of
12. LECTURE XII: PROPER PUSHFORWARD 117
compactly supported objects whose left Kan extension toC X commutes with colimits. Thus to
prove the claim giving and characterizingf !, we need to see that the left Kan extension off ‚àó from
the compactly supported objects does preserve colimits.
For this we use the more economical presentation of the colimit over all compactly supported
objects mapping toFto calculate the left Kan extension. For the functorf ! we then get the
definition
f!F:= lim‚àí ‚Üíi:V‚äÇX
f‚àó Fib(F ‚Üíi ‚àói‚àóF),
whereVruns over all closed subsets ofXwhose complement is contained in a compact subset. To
see that this preserves colimits inF, it suffices to fix such aVand show thatf ‚àó Fib(F ‚Üíi ‚àói‚àóF)
preserves colimits inF. But Fib(F ‚Üíi ‚àói‚àóF) preserves colimits inFand is supported on a
compact subset independent ofF, so the conclusion comes from the proper base change theorem
proved earlier.
The abstract nonsense with left Kan extensions then gives the natural transformation in (1),
and repeating the argument we just gave proves it‚Äôs an isomorphism on properly supported objects,
proving (1). Part (2) is clear from left Kan extension, and so is (3) from left Kan extension and
the proper base-change theorem. For (4), by left Kan extension it suffices to show that the natural
mapf ‚ôÆ ‚Üíf ‚àó is an iso on compactly supported objects ofC X. But indeed
f‚ôÆF= Fib(f ‚àóF ‚Üíi ‚àói‚àóf‚àóF)
whereiis the inclusion of the closed complementZofX‚äÇY, and ifFis supported in the compact
K‚äÇUthen we geti ‚àói‚àóf‚àóF= 0 fromK‚à©Z=‚àÖ.‚ñ°
Now that we have this well-behaved colimit preserving functorf ! :C X ‚ÜíC Y , we can ask
about its right adjoint. It turns out the right adjoint is also fairly well-behaved when the morphism
f:X‚ÜíYis boundaryless, i.e. locally onXandYidentifies with a Zariski closed immersion
followed by projection off an open polydisk. To phrase this precisely, we need the notion of an
object ofC X being ‚Äúhomologically bounded‚Äù. As we don‚Äôt have a global t-structure onC X, this
needs to be phrased with a bit of care. But the two possible definitions thankfully coincide:
Lemma12.16.LetXbe a complex analytic space,F ‚ààC X,x‚ààX, andd‚ààZ. The following
conditions are equivalent:
(1) There is a quasi-affinoid open neighborhoodUofxsuch that for all affinoid closed subspaces
M(A)‚äÇU, we haveŒì(F | M(A))‚àà D(Liq p)‚â§d.
(2) There is a quasi-affinoid open neighborhoodUofxsuch that theD(Liq p)-valued sheaf
sh(F)| U onUisd-truncated, i.e. for ally‚ààUthe stalk atylies inD(Liq p)‚â§d.
Furthermore, ifXis affinoid andŒì(F)‚àà D(Liq p)‚â§d, thenFsatisfies the above conditions at
allx‚ààXwithdreplaced byd‚àíN‚àí1, whereNis the cohomological dimension of the topological
spaceX.
Proof.Suppose (1) is satisfied. Then as the affinoid closed subspacesM(A)‚äÇUform a
neighborhood basis atx, the stalk ofsh(F)| U atxis a filtered colimit of the Œì(F | M(A)). Thus
(2) is satisfied. Now suppose (2) is satisfied. Then for any affinoid closed subspaceM(A)‚äÇU,
Œì(F |M(A)) is the global sections of ad-truncated sheaf and thus itselfd-truncated. Finally, the last
claim about affinoidAfollows from the proof of Proposition 9.17.‚ñ°
118 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
IfFsatisfies these two equivalent conditions, we say thatFis homologicallyd-bounded atx.
If for allx‚ààXthere is ad‚ààZsuch thatFis homologicallyd-bounded atx, we say thatFis
homologically bounded. If a collection (F i)i‚ààI of objects ofC X is such that for allx‚ààXthere is a
d‚ààZsuch thatF i is homologicallyd-bounded atxfor alli‚ààI, we say that (F i)i‚ààI isuniformly
homologically bounded.
Theorem12.17.Supposef:X‚ÜíYis a boundaryless morphism between Hausdorff complex
analytic spaces. If(F i)i‚ààI is a collection of objects ofC Y which is uniformly homologically bounded,
then the collection(f !F) i‚ààI of objects ofC X is also uniformly homologically bounded, and the natural
map M
i
f !(Fi) ‚àº‚Üíf !(
M
i
Fi)
is an isomorphism.
Proof.Sincej ! =j ‚àó for open inclusionsj, we can work locally onXandY, hence reduce
to the case wherefis the composition of a Zariski closed immersion and projection off an open
polydisk. The collection of mapsfsatisfying the conclusion is closed under composition, so we
separately reduce to the case of a Zariski closed immersion and projection off the one-dimensional
unit diskD.
For Zariski closed immersions, by Lemma 12.16 it suffices to show that ifA‚ÜíBgives a Zariski
closed immersion of affinoidsf:MB‚Üí MA, then
f ! : ModA(D(Liqp))‚ÜíMod B(D(Liqp))
sends Mod A(D(Liqp))‚â§0 to Mod B(D(Liqp))‚â§0. But indeed we have
f !M= RHom A(B, M),
so this follows from the fact thatB‚ààMod A(D(Liqp))‚â•0.
For projectionsf:D√óY‚ÜíY, we claim thatf ! commutes with base-change, satisfies
f ‚àóG ‚äóf !(OY ) ‚àº‚Üíf !(G),
and forY=‚àówe havef !(O‚àó) =O D[1]. Given these claims we easily deduce thatf ! =f ‚àó[1] for
generalY, which implies the statement of the theorem.
To prove the claims, by descent, we can reduce to the caseY=M(A) affinoid. Then we factor
fas the open inclusionj:D√óY‚äÇ D√óYfollowed by the (proper) projectionœÄtoY. The functor
j! is fully faithful, and furthermore
CD√óY = ModO(D)‚äóA(D(Liqp))
embeds fully faithfully into Mod A[T] (D(Liqp)) by the forgetful functor, due to idempotency. The
essential image ofj ! in this latter category consists exactly of thoseN‚ààMod A[T] (D(Liqp)) which
become 0 on base-change alongC[T]‚Üí O(|T| ‚â•1). Moreover, sinceœÄis a map of affinoids we
have thatœÄ ! =œÄ ‚àó is just a forgetful functor on module categories.
Now, letN‚ààMod A[T] (D(Liqp)) which dies on base-change alongC[T]‚Üí O(|T| ‚â•1), and let
M‚ààMod A(D(Liqp)). Then from the above we get
RHomCD√óY (N, f !M) = RHom A(N, M).
12. LECTURE XII: PROPER PUSHFORWARD 119
Now we calculate further, using only thatNdies on base-change alongC((T ‚àí1)) so that any
A[T]-module map fromNto anA‚äóC((T ‚àí1))-module vanishes:
RHomCD√óY (N, f !M) = RHom A(N, M)
= RHom A[T] (N,RHom A(A[T], M))
= RHom A[T] (N, M((T ‚àí1))/M[T])
= RHom A[T] (N, M[T])[1].
This givesf ! ‚âÉf ‚àó[1] via an isomorphism compatible with base-change, proving all the claims.‚ñ°
Now we can prove the main theorem of this lecture, the finiteness of proper pushforwards.
Theorem12.18 (Grauert‚Äôs Coherence Theorem).Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a boundaryless proper map
between complex analytic spaces. Then the functorf ‚àó :C X ‚ÜíC Y sendsD pc(X)toD pc(Y).
Remark12.19.The same proof applies also for ‚Äúfamilies of complex-analytic spaces over other
bases‚Äù, as in the work of Houzel [Hou73].
Proof.Working locally onY, we can assumeY=M(A) is affinoid, in particular compact
Hausdorff, henceXis also compact Hausdorff. By Proposition 9.19, it suffices to show that if
F ‚ààC X is nuclear (meaning its pullback to every affinoid is nuclear), then so isf ‚àóF, and if
F ‚ààC X is pseudocompact (meaning its pullback to every affinoid is pseudocompact), then so is
f‚àóF.
For the preservation of nuclearity, we can coverXby finitely many affinoids with affinoid
intersections to reduce to the fact that forgetful functors from module categories over nuclear
algebras preserve nuclearity, Lemma 8.20. For the preservation of pseudocompactness, suppose
(Mi)i‚ààI is a uniformly homologically bounded collection of elements of Mod A(D(Liqp)). First note
RHomA(f‚àóF,
M
i
Mi) = RHomCX(F, f !M
i
Mi)
becausef ‚àó =f ! by properness. But by Theorem 12.17,f ! commutes with this direct sum, and
for any affinoid closedi:M(B)‚äÇXtheB-modules (i ‚àóf !Mi)i‚ààI are also uniformly homologically
bounded. Applying this to a finite cover ofXby closed affinoids with affinoid intersection and
using descent, we deduce that
RHomCX(F,
M
i
f !Mi) =
M
i
RHomCX(F, f !Mi) =
M
i
RHomA(f‚àóF, Mi),
whence the conclusion.‚ñ°
TakingY=‚àó, this shows in particular that ifXis a compact complex analytic space in the
classical sense, andFis a coherent sheaf onX, then the total cohomology L
i H i(X,F) is finite
dimensional as aC-vector space. The proof we gave has some kinship with the classical Cartan‚Äì
Serre method for establishing such finite-dimensionality claims. But it is ‚Äúlocal‚Äù in the sense that
the key point is a more general property of the functorf ! for possibly non-proper maps, namely
that its right adjointf ! commutes with (homologically bounded) direct sums.
120 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
13. Lecture XIII: Serre Duality, and GAGA for coherent sheaves
In the first lecture, we promised to prove four theorems: Finiteness of Coherent Cohomology;
Serre Duality; GAGA; Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch. The first of those theorems was proved in
the last lecture, even in the relative case. Moreover, we already did some of the work towards
GAGA, and in the previous lecture also towards Serre Duality. The goal of this lecture is to finish
the discussion of Serre Duality and GAGA. Next week, we will discuss the proof of Hirzebruch‚Äì
Riemann‚ÄìRoch.
As before, we fix some 0< p‚â§1. Recall that we defined a (generalized) complex-analytic space
to be a categorified locale (X, C X , œÄX :S(C X)‚ÜíX) over (‚àó,D(Liq p(C)), œÄ:S(D(Liq p(C)))‚Üí ‚àó)
that is locally isomorphic to an open subspace of the categorified locale
M(A) := (HomC(A(‚àó),C),Mod A(D(Liqp)), œÄA)
associated to some affinoid algebraA. We note that this notion depends on the choice ofp. But
actually for a differentp ‚Ä≤ ‚â§p, there is a base change functor from the notion forp ‚Ä≤ to the notion
forp, and this turns out to be an equivalence of‚àû-categories (Exercise!); thus, the‚àû-category
of (generalized) complex-analytic spaces is independent of the choice ofp. (But givenX, the
‚àû-categoryC X depends onp.)
In the last lecture, several kinds of mapsf:X‚ÜíYof complex-analytic spaces were introduced:
(1) The mapfis a Zariski closed immersion if for every affinoidAwith a mapM(A)‚ÜíY, the
pullbackX√ó Y M(A) is affinoid, given by someM(B), andA‚ÜíBmakesB‚àà D pc,‚â•0(A)
withH 0A‚ÜíH 0Bsurjective.
(2) The mapfis separated if the diagonal ‚àÜ f :X‚ÜíX√ó Y Xis a Zariski closed immersion;
equivalently, if|X| ‚Üí |X√ó Y X|=|X| √ó |Y| |X|is a closed immersion of topological spaces.
(3) The mapfis proper if it is separated and quasicompact; equivalently, if|f|:|Y| ‚Üí |X|is
proper.
(4) The mapfis smooth if locally on source and targetfis isomorphic to a projection
Y√óD n ‚ÜíYfrom an open polydisc.
(5) The mapfis boundaryless if locally on source and targetfis isomorphic to a Zariski
closed immersion followed by a smooth map.
Moreover, we introduced for any separated mapf:X‚ÜíYthe functor
f! :C X ‚ÜíC Y ,
the pushforward with compact support, with a natural transformationf ! ‚Üíf ‚àó. Actually, we
worked under the small restriction thatYis itself separated over‚àó, i.e.|Y|is Hausdorff. (Thenf
is separated if and only if also|X|is Hausdorff.) Thenf ! is the colimit-preserving approximation
tof ‚àó. In fact, it agrees withf ‚àó on all objects that are compactly supported overY. In particular, if
fis proper, thenf ! =f ‚àó is just the usual pushforward. Moreover,f ! satisfies arbitrary base-change
and a projection formula. WritingXas an increasing union of closed subspaces proper overY, one
can then writef ! explicitly as a filtered colimit of sections with support in those closed subspaces.
Let
f ! :C Y ‚ÜíC X
be the right adjoint off !. (It is unique when it exists, and if we fixed a cutoff cardinalŒ∫, the
existence off ! would follow from the adjoint functor theorem for presentable‚àû-categories. It is
not hard to show that in fact these functors for different sufficiently largeŒ∫are compatible; in any
13. LECTURE XIII: SERRE DUALITY, AND GAGA FOR COHERENT SHEAVES 121
case, in all situations below where we computef !, that formula simultaneously shows that it is
well-defined.) To prove Serre duality, we need to identifyf ! for smooth morphisms. First, note
that there is always a natural transformation
f !OX ‚äóOY f ‚àóM‚Üíf !M
from a twisted version off ‚àó tof !. Indeed, this is adjoint to the natural transformation
f!(f !OX ‚äóOY f ‚àóM) =f !f !OX ‚äóOX M‚ÜíM
coming from the projection formula and the counitf !f !OX ‚Üí O X.
Proposition13.1.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a smooth morphism of complex-analytic spaces. Then
the natural transformation
f !OX ‚äóOY f ‚àó ‚Üíf !
is an isomorphism. Moreover,f !OX is locally isomorphic toO Y [d]wheredis the dimension off,
and the formation off ! commutes with any base change inY.
Proof.We can work locally onXandY. One can then reduce to the caseX=Y√óD n.
By induction onn, one can assumen= 1. It suffices to prove all claims whenYis affinoid.
(Indeed, when one knows base change compatibility in that case, one can use this to show by
descent to affinoidYthatf ! is always given by the desired formula, and commutes with base
change to affinoids.) Now the result follows from the computations in the end of the proof in
Theorem 12.17. ‚ñ°
To finish the proof of Serre duality, we need to identifyf !OX with Œ© d
Y /X[d]. Here, in caseY
is not derived, one can define Œ© 1
Y /X as usual asI/I 2 whereI‚äÇ O X√ó Y X is the ideal sheaf of the
diagonal. WhenYis derived, one has to be more careful with the meaning ofI 2. It can, however,
still be defined:
Proposition13.2.There is a functorial definition of a filtered gradedA-algebra(I n)n‚â•0 (in
D(A)) for any Zariski closed immersionA‚ÜíBof affinoid algebras, such thatI 0 =AandI 1 =I
is the homotopy fibre ofA‚ÜíB. AllI n lie inD pc,‚â•0(A). The filtered gradedA-algebra(I n)n‚â•0
commutes with any base change inA, and ifAandBare concentrated in degree0andA(‚àó)‚ÜíB(‚àó)
is a local complete intersection, then(I n)n‚â•0 sits in degree0and agrees with the usual filteredA-
algebra of powers ofI= ker(A‚ÜíB).
Note that everything here is relatively discrete overA, so it suffices to prove the analogous
result for the map of abstract derived ringsA(‚àó)‚ÜíB(‚àó). More generally, one has the following
result; a very related (and more detailed) discussion is in [Mao21, Section 3]. (Here, we use the
notion of animated commutative rings, which are ‚Äúsimplicial commutative rings up to homotopy‚Äù.
In characteristic 0, this is the same thing as a connectiveE‚àû-algebra, as used previously. In positive
or mixed characteristic, the notions diverge. There is still a functor from animated rings toE ‚àû-
rings; for geometric questions, generally animated rings behave better. For example, free animated
rings are given by polynomial algebras, while freeE ‚àû-rings are very hard to understand.)
Proposition13.3 (cf. [Mao21, Corollary 3.54]).LetA‚ÜíBbe a map of animated commu-
tative rings that is surjective in degree0. Consider the initial animated filteredA-algebra(I n)n‚â•0
equipped with a map of animatedA-algebrasB‚ÜíI 0/I1. Then the natural mapsA‚ÜíI 0 and
B‚ÜíI 0/I1 are isomorphisms; in particularI=I 1 is the fibre ofA‚ÜíB. Moreover, there is a
122 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
natural isomorphismL B/A[‚àí1] ‚àº= I1/I2, and the natural mapsSym n
B(I/I 2)‚ÜíI n/I n+1 are iso-
morphisms. The formation of(I n)n‚â•0 commutes with any base change inA, and ifAandBare
concentrated in degree0andA‚ÜíBis a local complete intersection, then(I n)n‚â•0 sits in degree0
and agrees with the usual filteredA-algebra of powers ofI.
We stress that we need this result only in case the base spaceYis derived.
Proof.It is clear that the formation of (I n)n‚â•0 commutes with all colimits inB, and is
compatible with base change. Moreover, there are mapsA‚ÜíI 0,B‚ÜíI 0/I1 andL B/A ‚ÜíI/I 2[1]
(asA/I 2 is a square-zero extension ofBbyI 1/I2) and Symn(I/I 2)‚ÜíI n/I n+1 (the latter exists for
any animated filtered algebra). We claim that these are isomorphisms. As everything commutes
with all sifted colimits, one can assume that
B=A/ L(a1, . . . , an) =A‚äó L
Z[X1,...,Xn] Z
for some set of elementsa 1, . . . , an ‚ààA; indeed, under sifted colimits such animatedA-algebras
generate all animatedA-algebrasBwithH 0A‚ÜíH 0Bsurjective. By base change compatibility,
one can then assume thatA=Z[X 1, . . . , Xn] andB=Z(with allX i mapping to 0). It is then
enough to prove the final claim, that for complete intersections, it gives the usual algebra of powers
ofI. By K Ãà unneth, this can be reduced to the case of one variable, so toA=Z[X]‚ÜíB=Z.
But in this case one gets the free animated filteredA-algebra on a generatorYin filtered degree
1, modulo the relationY=X. The first step givesZ[X, Y] filtered byY nZ[X, Y], and the second
cuts it down toZ[X] filtered byX nZ[X], as desired.‚ñ°
Using this construction, we can define a general deformation to the normal cone. Namely, recall
that filtered objects can equivalently be considered asG m-equivariant objects overA 1, by the Rees
construction. We can always glue them toG m-equivariant objects overP 1 by using the trivial
filtration at‚àû. In this language, we arrive at the following construction, if we extend the above
filtered algebra (In)n‚â•0 to the fullZ-indexed case by settingI n =Aforn‚â§0. (Actually, we ignore
theG m-action here for simplicity.)
Construction13.4.Letf:A‚ÜíBbe a map of animated commutative rings that is surjective
onH 0, letIbe the fibre off, and considerI n as in Construction 13.3. Then there is a Zariski
closed immersion
eY=P 1
B ‚Üí eX
of affine derived schemes overP 1
Z such that overP 1
Z \ {0}it is isomorphic to the base change of
Spec(B)‚ÜíSpec(A) from Spec(Z) toP 1
Z \ {0}, and the fibre over 0 is isomorphic to the embedding
Spec(B)‚ÜíSpec(
M
n‚â•0
I n/I n+1) = Spec(Sym‚Ä¢(LB/A[‚àí1])),
the (derived) normal cone onL B/A[‚àí1].
The cotangent complexL eY / eX is isomorphic to the pullback ofL B/A toP 1
B, twisted byO(‚àí1).
IfBis pseudocoherent overA, then also eY‚Üí eXis pseudocoherent.
Proof.One takes eXas corresponding to the animated filtered commutative ring L
n‚ààZ I n,
and eYcorresponding to L
n‚â§0 B. Only the statement thatL eY / eX is isomorphic to the pullback of
LB/A twisted byO(‚àí1) must be proved. Note thatD(B)‚ÜíD(P 1
B) is fully faithful, so it suffices
13. LECTURE XIII: SERRE DUALITY, AND GAGA FOR COHERENT SHEAVES 123
to see thatL eY / eX(1) lies in the essential image. This condition is stable under sifted colimits inB,
so as in the last construction we can reduce toA=Z[X 1, . . . , Xn] andB=Z. In that case, one
gets the usual deformation to the normal cone, and the result is readily verified.‚ñ°
Remark13.5.Another consequence of Construction 13.3 is the construction of blow-ups of
derived schemes, by taking the projective spectrum of the animated gradedA-algebra L
n‚â•0 I n.
The previous construction can be understood as an open subscheme of the blow-up ofP 1
A along
Spec(B)√ó {0} ‚ÜíP 1
A.
To identify the dualizing complexf !OY for smooth mapsf:X‚ÜíY, we note that it is enough
to identify the pullbacks ‚àóf !OX along a sections:Y‚ÜíX. Indeed, pulling backf:X‚ÜíYalong
the mapg:Y ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíYgiven byf=g:X=Y ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíY, with fibre product
f ‚Ä≤ :X ‚Ä≤ =X√ó Y Y ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíY ‚Ä≤,
andg ‚Ä≤ :X ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíXthe other projection, it acquires the universal sections:Y ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíX ‚Ä≤ given by the
diagonalY ‚Ä≤ =X‚ÜíX ‚Ä≤ =X√ó Y X, and then the base change compatibility off ! shows that
s‚àóf ‚Ä≤!OY ‚Ä≤ =s ‚àóg‚Ä≤‚àóf !OX =f !OY .
Thus, to computef !OY , it suffices to computes ‚àóf ‚Ä≤!OY ‚Ä≤, as promised.
Thus, assume from now on that the smooth mapf:X‚ÜíYcomes with a sections:Y‚ÜíX.
To computes ‚àóf !OY , we deformY‚ÜíXto the normal cone (locally on the corresponding affinoid
algebras, and then analytify). This gives a map of complex-analytic spaces
ef: eX‚Üí eY=P 1
Y
with a sectiones: eY‚Üí eX, such that away from 0‚ààP 1 this is isomorphic to the base change of
Y‚ÜíX, and over 0 it is isomorphic to the normal coneY‚ÜíN Y‚äÇX overY.
Now consider
es‚àóef !OP1
Y
(1)‚ààC P1
Y
.
The pullback functor
œÄ‚àó :C Y ‚ÜíC P1
Y
is fully faithful ‚Äì for this, it suffices to see thatœÄ ‚àóœÄ‚àó is the identity, but this is given by tensoring
withœÄ ‚àóOP1
Y
by the projection formula, and the latter is justO Y . We claim that
es‚àóef !OP1
Y
(d)‚ààœÄ ‚àóCY ‚äÇC P1
Y
wheredis the dimension off. This can be checked locally onYand after replacingXby an open
neighborhood of the section, so we can assume thatX=Y√óD d. Then we can assumeY=‚àóis a
point, where it follows from a direct computation.
But this means that all fibres ofes‚àóef !OP1
Y
(d) along sections ofP1
Y ‚ÜíYare canonically isomorphic
(as they map isomorphically toœÄ ‚àóes‚àóef !OP1
Y
(d)). But the fibre over 1‚ààP 1 is justs ‚àóf !OY , while the
fibre over 0‚ààP 1 is the similar object for the normal coneY‚äÇN Y‚äÇX . The latter evidently only
depends ons ‚àóŒ©1
X/Y . In fact, we can now consider the association that takes anyYequipped with
a rankdvector bundlef:E‚ÜíYto 0 ‚àóf !OY . This defines an invertible object ofC [‚àó/GLd] for the
stack [‚àó/GLd] (for the open cover topology). As it is given by a line bundle shifted into degreed,
124 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
to identify it, it suffices to identify it forY=‚àóa point, with the GL d-action on it. This can be
done easily, finally showing that there is a natural isomorphism
s‚àóf !OY ‚àº= Œ©d
X/Y [d].
We have proved the following theorem.
Theorem13.6 (Serre Duality).For ad-dimensional smooth mapf:X‚ÜíYof (generalized)
complex-analytic spaces, there is a natural isomorphism
f !M ‚àº= f ‚àóM‚äó OX Œ©d
X/Y [d]
of functorsC Y ‚ÜíC X.
Let us discuss this theorem in caseY=‚àóis a point. IfXis proper, it gives the usual Serre
duality, extended from coherent sheaves to all ‚Äúliquid quasicoherent sheaves‚Äù. Indeed, for any
M‚ààC X, we get
Hom(f‚àóM,C) = Hom(f !M,C) =f ‚àóHom(M, f !C) =f ‚àó(Hom(M,O X)‚äóŒ© d
X)[d],
identifying the dual of the cohomologyRŒì(X, M) =f ‚àóMwith the cohomologyRŒì(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X)
up to a shift by degreed. HereM ‚à® := Hom(M,O X).
But we can also apply this result in caseXis not proper. Then it is still true that the dual of
RŒìc(X, M) =f !M‚àà D(Liq p(C))
is given byRŒì(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X). We note that ifX‚àà D pc(X) is (pseudo)coherent, thenRŒì c(X, M) is
basic nuclear, as follows from the formula forf ! from the proof of Theorem 12.15. In particular, all
cohomology groupsH i
c(X, M) are quotients of DNF spaces. Note that ifVis a DNF space, then
by Mittag-Leffler, one has Ext i
C(V,C) = 0 fori >0. Thus, for quotients of DNF spaces, one gets
vanishing of Exti fori >1. The derived duality therefore induces short exact sequences
0‚ÜíExt 1
C(H d‚àíi+1
c (X, M),C)‚ÜíH i(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X)‚ÜíHom C(H d‚àíi
c (X, M),C)‚Üí0.
This gives a statement on the level of individual cohomology groups even if these cohomology groups
are not quasiseparated. The algebra here is very similar to the algebra in Poincar ÃÅ e duality in case
there is torsion in the cohomology. More precisely, ifVis any quotient of DNF spaces, there is a
maximal quasiseparated quotient V, which is a DNF space; the kernel ofV‚Üí Vcan be identified
with the closureV 0 ‚äÇVof 0‚ààV. We get a short exact sequence
0‚ÜíV 0 ‚ÜíV‚Üí V‚Üí0.
Then Hom C(V,C) = Hom C(V ,C) while Ext 1
C(V,C) = Ext 1(V 0,C). Using the (underived) duality
between DNF and NF spaces, one can show thatV 0 Ã∏= 0 if and only if Ext 1
C(V 0,C)Ã∏= 0, and that
in the latter{0}is dense. Thus, the above short exact sequence can be rewritten as
0‚ÜíExt 1
C(H d‚àíi+1
c (X, M)0,C)‚ÜíH i(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X)‚ÜíHom C(H d‚àíic (X, M),C)‚Üí0,
where the first term is precisely the closure of 0‚ààH i(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X), and the last term is the
quasiseparated quotient ofH i(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X) (and is a nuclear Fr ÃÅ echet space). In particular:
Corollary13.7.IfXis a complex manifold of dimensiondandM‚àà D pc(X), thenH d‚àíi+1
c (X, M)
is quasiseparated if and only ifH i(X, M ‚à® ‚äóŒ© d
X)is quasiseparated.
13. LECTURE XIII: SERRE DUALITY, AND GAGA FOR COHERENT SHEAVES 125
Finally, let us say a few words about GAGA. Generalizing our previous discussion slightly, we
can actually start with any affinoid algebraAand a proper derived schemeXoverA. It admits
an analytificationX an overA, and there is an equivalenceC X ‚àº= CX an; the proof is the same as
before. We note thatX an is actually proper (overM(A), or, as that one is proper, equivalently in
the absolute sense). It is easy to see that it is separated, using the compatibility of all constructions
with fibre products, and with Zariski closed immersions. For quasicompacity, we use the following
proposition:
Proposition13.8.For any complex-analytic spaceY, the mapœÄ Y :S(C Y )‚Üí |Y|has the
property that a closed subsetZ‚äÇ |Y|is quasicompact if and only if the preimage ofZinS(C Y )is
quasicompact.
Proof.This can be checked on affinoid pieces, where it follows from the construction, which
associated to closed subsets of the compact Hausdorff space|M(A)|idempotent algebras (whose
corresponding locale is quasicompact).‚ñ°
Thus, to see that|X an|is quasicompact, it suffices to see thatS(C X an) is quasicompact. But
this agrees withS(C X), and the latter is quasicompact for any schemeXthat is separated and of
finite type. Indeed, it is glued in finitely many steps fromS(C A) for liquid algebrasA, and those
are quasicompact.
Remark13.9.This gives a proof that forXa proper scheme overC, the spaceX(C) is
compact Hausdorff that does not use Chow‚Äôs lemma in order to reduce to projective space, but
instead directly uses the valuative criterion.
InsideC X, we haveD pc(X)‚äÇC X, by gluing on affine pieces the derived‚àû-category of pseu-
docoherent complexes; these can be characterized as the discrete pseudocompact objects (and
using this description one can prove that this glues). The functorC X ‚ÜíC X an takesD pc(X) into
Dpc(Xan). Finally, we can formulate the ‚Äúusual‚Äù form of GAGA.
Theorem13.10 (GAGA).The fully faithful functorD pc(X),‚Üí D pc(Xan)is an equivalence of
‚àû-categories.
We note that the mere fully faithfulness already includes the comparison of cohomology.
Proof.It remains to see that for allM‚àà D pc(Xan) and any affine Spec(B)‚äÇX, letting
i‚àó :C X an ‚àº= CX ‚ÜíC B be the pullback functor, the preimagei ‚àóMlies inD pc(B)‚äÇC B =
ModB(D(Liqp)). We already know that it is pseudocompact (asi ‚àó commutes with all direct sums).
Thus, it remains to see that it is discrete. AsBitself is discrete, it suffices to see thatRŒì(i ‚àóM) =
RŒì(Xan, i‚àói‚àóM) is discrete. We note that by blowing up (some ideal sheaf supported at) the
boundaryD=X\Spec(B), we can assume that the boundaryDis a Cartier divisor. Then
i‚àói‚àóM= colim nM(‚àínD), and
RŒì(Xan, i‚àói‚àóM) = colim nRŒì(Xan, M(‚àínD)).
Here eachM(‚àínD)‚àà D pc(Xan), so by Theorem 12.18, one hasRŒì(X an, M(‚àínD))‚àà D pc(A),
which in particular is discrete. Thus, also the colimit overnis discrete, as desired.‚ñ°
Exercise13.11.A mapf:X‚ÜíYis a local complete intersection if it is locally the composite
of a Zariski closed immersion that is a (derived) base change of‚àó ‚ÜíD n, and a smooth map. Show
that the natural transformation
f !OY ‚äóOX f ‚àó ‚Üíf !
126 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
is an isomorphism, and thatf !OY is naturally isomorphic to det(LX/Y ). HereL X/Y is the cotangent
complex, which is a perfect complex with amplitude [0,1]; and for a 2-term complex of finite
projective modules [P 1 ‚ÜíP 0], one defines
det([P1 ‚ÜíP 0]) =
r0^
(P0)[r0]‚äó(
r1^
P1)‚à®[‚àír1],
withr i = rk(P i). (Hint: For the isomorphismf !OY ‚àº= det(LX/Y ), follow the argument in the
smooth case, by base change to the case with a universal section, and a deformation to the normal
cone. This time, this will introduce truly derived spaces even in caseAandBare in degree 0.
Finally, analyze the universal case [M r0√ór1/GLr0 √óGL r1] directly.)
14. LECTURE XIV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART I 127
14. Lecture XIV: Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch, part I
The set-up for the following discussion will be a pair (X, V) whereXis a compact complex
manifold, meaningf:X‚Üí ‚àóis a proper smooth map of complex analytic spaces without boundary
in the terminology of the previous lectures, andVis a vector bundle onX(a locally freeO X-module
sheaf of finite rank). By Theorem 12.18, the total cohomology ofVis finite-dimensional in each
degree:
f‚àóV=RŒì(X;V)‚àà D pc(C).
But actually we can also see thatf ‚àóVlives in only finitely many degrees, for example because the
spaceXhas finite cohomological dimension.
In any case, a crucial question for applications is what the dimensions
dimC H i(X;V)
of the individual cohomology groups of (X, V) are. However, this is difficult to answer in generality,
because these dimensions are highly sensitive to the geometry of (X, V). In particular, they can
jump in families. To obtain a more robust invariant, we instead look at the Euler characteristic
œá(X, V) :=
‚àûX
i=0
(‚àí1)i dimC H i(X;V).
As a consequence of the proper base change theorem, this integer is (locally) constant in families.
TheHirzebruch-Riemann-Roch (HRR) Theoremprovides a formula forœá(X, V) where all the terms
in the formula are in some sense ‚Äútopological‚Äù invariants of (X, V). In particular they are quite
computable, and they also give another explanation for this robustness ofœá(X, V). The formula
looks as follows:
œá(X, V) =
Z
X
ch(V)¬∑Td(T X).
To make sense of the right-hand side, we need to choose a cohomology theory on compact complex
manifolds. We will take what is in some sense the simplest (or at least the easiest to relate to
coherent cohomology), namelyHodge cohomology.
Definition14.1.LetXbe a complex manifold. Define:
Hdg(X) =
M
i‚â•0
Œ©i[i]‚ààPerf(X)‚äÇC X ,
and
Hdg(X) =RŒì(X;Hdg(X))‚àà D(Liq p).
Thus, in degree 0 we get
H0 Hdg(X) =
M
i‚â•0
H i(X; Œ©i).
Remark14.2.As usual, for purposes of reducing questions to affinoids, it‚Äôs useful to extend
this definition to the case whereXis a complex manifold ‚Äúwith boundary‚Äù, meaningXis a complex
analytic space which is locally isomorphic to an open subspace of a closed polydisk. The bundle of
one-forms Œ©1, hence ofi-forms Œ© i, can be just as well defined for suchX, namely Œ© 1 =I/I 2 where
Iis the ideal inO X√óX giving the Zariski closed immersion ‚àÜ X :X‚ÜíX√óX.
128 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Note thatHdg(X) and Hdg(X) are contravariantly functorial, via pullback of differential forms.
They also have commutative ring structures, induced by wedge product of differential forms. The
classes ch(V),Td(T X) will lie inH 0 Hdg(X), and
R
X will be a map
Z
X
: Hdg(X)‚ÜíC,
allowing to make sense of the right-hand side of the HRR formula. To explain this in more detail,
let‚Äôs start with the following basic observation.
Lemma14.3.LetXbe a compact complex manifold. ThenHdg(X)‚ààPerf(C), and for every
other complex manifold with boundaryYthe K Ãà unneth map
Hdg(X)‚äóHdg(Y) ‚àº‚ÜíHdg(X√óY)
is an isomorphism.
Proof.Note that Œ© i
X = 0 fori >dim(X), so the direct sum definingHdg(X) is actually
finite, soHdg(X)‚ààPerf(X). As remarked above, this implies that Hdg(X)‚ààPerf(C) as well (see
also Lemma 14.8). The second claim follows from applying the proper base-change theorem to the
pullback ofX‚Üí ‚àó ‚ÜêY.‚ñ°
Next, we introduce the first Chern class for line bundles, with values in Hodge cohomology.
Line bundles are locally free sheaves of rank one, so they are classified by elements ofH 1(X;O √ó
X),
and we simply take the map
c1 :H 1(X;O √ó
X)‚ÜíH 1(X; Œ©1)‚äÇH 0 Hdg(X)
induced by the homomorphismdlog :O √ó
X ‚ÜíŒ© 1 given by
dlog(f) = d f
f .
With the first Chern class in hand, we can state the projective bundle formula.
Proposition14.4.LetXbe a complex manifold with boundary andVa vector bundle overX
of rankd. For the associated projective bundleœÄ:P(V)‚ÜíX, we have that
d‚àí1M
i=0
Hdg(X) ‚àº‚ÜíHdg(P(V)),
where the map on thei th summand is given by pulling back viaœÄand then multiplying withc 1(O(1))i.
Proof.Note that both sides satisfy descent inX, and the map is natural. So it suffices to show
this whenVis trivial. But thenœÄ:P(V)‚ÜíXis pulled back fromP d‚àí1 ‚Üí ‚àó, so by the K Ãà unneth
formula we reduce to calculating the Hodge cohomology ofP d‚àí1. By GAGA we can perform this
calculation in the algebraic category instead, and then it is a standard exercise.‚ñ°
Following Grothendieck ([Gro58]), this lets us define Chern classes for vector bundles. First,
there is the all-importantsplitting principle:
Lemma14.5.For any vector bundleVover a complex manifold with boundaryX, there exists
a proper smooth map of complex manifolds with boundaryf:Y‚ÜíXsuch that:
14. LECTURE XIV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART I 129
(1)f ‚àóVadmits a full flag, i.e. a filtration by sub-bundles where each successive quotient is a
line bundle.
(2)f ‚àó :H 0 Hdg(X),‚ÜíH 0 Hdg(Y)is injective.
Proof.TakeYto be the relative Grassmannian classifying full flags inX. Then (1) holds by
construction, and (2) follows by the projective bundle formula, sinceY‚ÜíXis a composition of
projective bundles. ‚ñ°
Theorem14.6.The exists a unique assignmentV7‚Üíc(V)‚ààH 0 Hdg(X)[[t]]for an arbitrary
vector bundleVover a complex manifold with boundaryX, such that:
(1)V7‚Üíc(V)commutes with pullbacks;
(2) If0‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0is a short exact sequence of vector bundles onX, then
c(V) =c(V ‚Ä≤)¬∑c(V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤);
(3) IfV=Lis a line bundle, thenc(L) = 1 +c 1(L)¬∑t.
Proof.Uniqueness is clear by the splitting principle. For existence, definec(V) to be given by
the coefficients (with some signs, and in reverse order) ofc 1(O(1))d as a polynomial in the previous
powers ofc 1(O(1)), using the projective bundle formula. We refer to [Gro58] for the details.‚ñ°
Using these Chern classes, we can define the Chern character and Todd class, which appear in
the HHR formula.
Theorem14.7.There exists a unique assignmentV7‚Üích(V)‚ààH 0 Hdg(X)for an arbitrary
vector bundleVover a complex manifold with boundaryX, such that:
(1)V7‚Üích(V)commutes with pullbacks;
(2) If0‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0is a short exact sequence of vector bundles onX, then
ch(V) = ch(V ‚Ä≤) + ch(V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤).
(3) IfV=Lis a line bundle, thench(L) =e c1(L).
Moreover, we havech(V‚äóW) = ch(V)¬∑ch(W). Heree c1(L) is to be understood as a formal power
series inc 1(L), which is actually a polynomial asc 1(L)i ‚ààH i(X; Œ©i) = 0fori >dim(X).
Similarly, there exists a unique assignmentV7‚ÜíTd(V)‚ààH 0 Hdg(X)for an arbitrary vector
bundleVover a complex manifold with boudnaryX, such that:
(1)V7‚ÜíTd(V)commutes with pullbacks;
(2) If0‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0is a short exact sequence of vector bundles onX, then
Td(V) = Td(V ‚Ä≤)¬∑Td(V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤).
(3) IfV=Lis a line bundle, thenTd(L) = c1(L)
1‚àíe‚àíc1(L) .
Proof.Uniqueness is clear by the splitting principle. For existence, one writes down the
appropriate universal power series in the Chern classes. See [HBS66] for the details.‚ñ°
To finish explaining the meaning of the HRR formula, which we recall reads
œá(X, V) =
Z
X
ch(V)¬∑Td(T X),
we need to define the ‚Äútrace‚Äù map
Z
X
: Hdg(X)‚ÜíC
130 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
for a compact complex manifoldX. This is done using Serre duality. Namely, by projecting on to
thed-summand wheredis the dimension ofX(working separately on each connected component
ifXis not connected), we get a map
Hdg(X) =
M
i‚â•0
Œ©i[i]‚ÜíŒ© d[d]‚âÉf !C,
whence
Hdg(X)‚Üíf ‚àóf !C‚ÜíC,
as desired. Here the isomorphism Œ© d[d]‚âÉf !Cis Serre duality, and the mapf ‚àóf !C‚ÜíCis the
counit for the adjunction.
This finishes the statement of the HRR formula. But before moving on to start the proof, let
us make a further remark about this trace map we just introduced. Namely, the objectHdg(X)‚àà
Perf(X) is canonically self-dual with respect to the invertible object Œ© d[d]‚âÉf !C. More precisely,
the map
Hdg(X)‚äó Hdg(X)‚Üí Hdg(X)‚ÜíŒ© d[d]
induced by multiplication followed by projection to the top-dimensional component is a perfect
pairing in Perf(X). This is a general fact about exterior algebras. Combining with Serre duality,
we deduce that Hdg(X)‚ààPerf(C) is also canonically self-dual via the perfect pairing
Hdg(X)‚äóHdg(X)‚ÜíHdg(X)
R
X
‚ÜíC
where the first map is multiplication. In terms of this self-duality, we can say that
R
X is dual to
the unit mapC‚ÜíHdg(X).
Now let‚Äôs move towards the proof of HRR. For this, we will actually need to state and prove
a generalization, called theGrothendieck-Riemann-Roch (GRR) theorem. The idea is to at first
forget about the Todd class, and focus only on the Chern character. This is a map
ch : Vect(X)/‚àº‚àí ‚ÜíH 0 Hdg(X)
from isomorphism classes of vector bundles to Hodge cohomology, but Grothendieck explains how
to promote it to a natural transformation of cohomology theories, by introducingK-theory, a
cohomology theory which is formally built out of vector bundles. Namely,K 0(Vect(X)) is the free
abelian group on Vect(X)/‚àºmodulo the relations
[V] = [V ‚Ä≤] + [V ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤]
running over all short exact sequences 0‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíV‚ÜíV ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0. There is a ring structure
onK 0(Vect(X)) induced by tensor product of vector bundles, and then we can view the Chern
character as a natural transformation
ch :K 0(Vect(X))‚àí ‚ÜíH 0 Hdg(X)
of cohomology theories, i.e. contravariant functors from complex manifolds to commutative rings.
Then Grothendieck rephrases the HRR question as that of how to address the compatibility of
ch with the naturalpushforwardstructures which exist on both cohomology theories. But actually,
to do this we have to work with a modification of theK-theory of vector bundles, namely the
K-theory of perfect complexes, since it is only on the level of perfect complexes that we actually
have a pushforward functoriality. TheK-theory of perfect complexes,K 0(Perf(X)), is defined
14. LECTURE XIV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART I 131
analogously to that of vector bundles, but we replace short exact sequences with distinguished
triangles (or cofiber sequences in the stable‚àû-category language).
Then the pushforward onK-theory of perfect complexes comes from the following category-level
statement.
Lemma14.8.Letf:X‚ÜíYbe a map of compact complex manfiolds. Thenf ‚àó :C X ‚ÜíC Y
sendsPerf(X)toPerf(Y).
Proof.Let us more generally prove the claim whenfis a boundaryless proper map between
complex manifolds with boundary. By descent and proper base-change, we can reduce to whereY
is a closed polydisk, in particular proper. From Theorem 12.18 we know thatf ‚àóF ‚àà D pc(Y) for
F ‚àà D pc(X), so in particular forF ‚ààPerf(X). Thus it suffices to show thatf ‚àóFis a compact
object ofC Y whenF ‚ààPerf(X). But a perfect complex on a compact analytic space is a compact
object (by descent from the affinoid case), so for this it suffices to show thatf ‚àó preserves compact
objects. And for that it suffices to see that the right adjointf ! commutes with direct sums. But
we can factorfas the composition of an lci Zariski closed immersion followed by a smooth map
using the graph trick, so this follows claim follows from the formulas given forf ! in those two cases
in the previous lecture.‚ñ°
Thus, for a mapf:X‚ÜíYof compact complex manifolds, we have not just the contravariant
f ‚àó :K 0(Perf(Y))‚ÜíK 0(Perf(X))
induced by pullback of perfect complexes, but also the covariant
f‚àó :K 0(Perf(X))‚ÜíK 0(Perf(Y))
induced by pushforward of perfect complexes.
We also have a pushforward structure on Hodge cohomology, defined in a completely different
way: we can take
f‚àó : Hdg(X)‚ÜíHdg(Y)
to be the dual tof ‚àó : Hdg(Y)‚ÜíHdg(X) via the self-duality of Hdg(‚àí) coming from Serre duality.
Then the fact of life is that our natural transformation
ch :K 0(Vect(X))‚àí ‚ÜíH 0 Hdg(X)
does not intertwine these pushforward structures (why should it?). However, this can be corrected
by modifying the pushforward structure on Hodge cohomology, namely, by conjugating with the
Todd classes of the tangent bundles. Formally:
Theorem14.9.We work in the category of compact complex manifolds.
(1) There is a natural transformation ech :K 0(Perf(X))‚ÜíH 0 Hdg(X)of multiplicative coho-
mology theories on compact complex manifolds extendingch :K 0(Vect(X))‚àí ‚ÜíH 0 Hdg(X).
(2) Iff:X‚ÜíYis a map of compact complex manifolds, then forc‚ààK 0(Perf(X)), we have
ech(f‚àóc)¬∑Td(T Y ) =f ‚àó(ech(c)¬∑Td(T X))‚ààH 0 Hdg(Y).
WhenY=‚àó, this GRR theorem exactly recovers the HRR theorem. But to prove even that
special case, we need to consider the general case.
132 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Remark14.10.In principle, one should state and prove this result more generally, for an
arbitrary proper map of not-necessarily-compact complex manifolds. The proof we present here
does not directly give that generalization.
Now we can explain the strategy of proof. We will introduce an intermediary cohomology theory
HH(X), which in some sense lies halfway betweenK(Perf(X)) and Hdg(X). This HH(X) also has
a natural pushforward structure. We will define ech as a composition of natural transformations of
multiplicative cohomology theoreis
K0(Perf(X)) Œ±‚àí ‚ÜíH0 HH(X)
Œ≤
‚àí ‚ÜíH0 Hdg(X),
where:
(1)Œ±also commutes with pushforwards, on the nose, without any Todd classes or correction
factors;
(2)Œ≤is an isomorphism.
This reduces the GRR problem to showing that two different pushfowards structures on the
same cohomology theory agree: namely, the cohomology theory is Hodge cohomology, and the two
different pushforwards are the one from Serre duality twisted by the Todd class, and the one coming
from HH(X) via the isomorphismŒ≤.
In the rest of this lecture, we will define HH(X) and produce the isomorphismŒ≤, and in the
next lecture we will do the remainder of the work.
Definition14.11.LetXbe a complex manifold with boundary, and let ‚àÜ :X‚ÜíX√óX
denote the diagonal. Define theHochschild homology
HH(X) := ‚àÜ ‚àó‚àÜ‚àóOX ‚ààPerf(X),
and
HH(X) =RŒì(X;HH(X))‚àà D(Liq p).
Note that these are commutative algebra objects, contravariantly functorial inXvia pullback.
By descent, they are determined by the affinoid case, and ifX=M(A) is affinoid, then
HH(X) =A‚äó A‚äóA A,
where all tensor products are derived liquid tensor products. Here let‚Äôs say that theA-algebra
structure on HH(X), promoting it toHH(X), comes from the right hand factor.
The first step to constructing the isomorphismŒ≤relating Hochschild homology to Hodge coho-
mology is theHochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg (HKR) theorem.
Theorem14.12.LetXbe a complex manifold with boundary. Then there is a natural isomor-
phism
H‚àóHH(X)‚âÉ
M
i
Œ©i[i]
of graded commutative algebra objects in the category of coherent sheaves onX.
Proof.By descent, it suffices to construct such a natural isomorphism whenX=M(A) is an
affinoid isomorphic to a closed polydisk. Take the boundary map associated to the fiber sequence
I‚ÜíA‚äóA‚ÜíA
14. LECTURE XIV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART I 133
and apply‚àí ‚äó A‚äóA A; this gives a natural map ofA-modules
HH(A)‚ÜíŒ£I‚äó A‚äóA A,
whence onH 1 a natural map ofA-modules
H1HH(A)‚ÜíŒ© 1
A.
It suffices to show that this map is an isomorphism, and that
Œõ‚àó
AH1HH(A) ‚àº‚ÜíH ‚àóHH(A).
Choosing an isomorphism with the closed unit disk, the resulting map
C[x1, . . . , xn]‚ÜíA
is idempotent in liquid algebras and flat as a map of discrete rings, so we reduce to the analogous
claims forA=C[x 1, . . . , xn], where it is a simple Koszul complex calculation. (One can even use
a K Ãà unneth argument to reduce to the casen= 1.)‚ñ°
Now we would like to promote this to a natural commutative algebra isomorphismHH(X)‚âÉL
i Œ©i[i] inC X. For that we will use a trick: the action of Adams operations onHH(X). Again,
by descent it suffices to consider the affinoid caseX=M(A). Then
HH(A) =A‚äó A‚äóA A=A ‚äóS1
,
the coproduct ofAindexed by the animaS 1 in the‚àû-category of commutative algebra objects of
D(Liqp). Indeed, this holds because the animaS 1 is the pushout of‚àó ‚Üê ‚àó ‚äî ‚àó ‚Üí ‚àó. Moreover, the
A-algebra structure on HH(A), promoting it toHH(A), comes from the inclusion of a base-point
inS 1.
We consider the degree two mapS 1 ‚ÜíS 1. It sends the base-point to the base-point, so it
induces a natural commutativeA-algebra endomorphism
œà2 : HH(A)‚ÜíHH(A).
The key is the following.
Lemma14.13.OnH i HH(A), the endomorphismœà 2 induces the map of multiplication by2 i.
Proof.By multiplicativity and HKR, it suffices to check this onH 1, and as in the previous
proof we can reduce to the case of a polynomial algebra in one generator, where it is a simple
calculation after choosing a simplicial model for the degree two map onS 1.‚ñ°
Now we have the more refined HKR theorem.
Theorem14.14.LetXbe a complex manifold with boundary. Then there is a natural isomor-
phism
HH(X)‚âÉ
M
i
Œ©i[i] =Hdg(X)
of commutative algebra objects inC X, and hence on global sections a natural isomorphism
Œ≤: HH(X)‚âÉHdg(X)
of commutative algebra objects inD(Liq p).
134 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Proof.Note thatHdg(X) is the free commutative algebra object on Œ© 1[1]. Indeed, we are in
characteristic 0, so there are no higher derived functors of Œ£ n-invariants, and as Œ©1[1] lives in odd
degree the symmetric power becomes an alternating power due to the Koszul sign rule. Thus, by
the above HKR theorem on homology, it suffices to show that there‚Äôs a natural map
(H1HH(X))[1]‚Üí HH(X)
inC X inducing an isomorphism onH 1. For this, work on affinoids, and considerœà 2 just as an
A-module endomorphism ofHH(A), giving anA[T]-module structure whereTacts byœà 2. Then
asT‚àí2 andT‚àí2 i generate the unit ideal foriÃ∏= 1, the previous lemma implies that theA-module
map
HH(A)‚Üí HH(A)[ 1
T‚àí2 ]
is an isomorphism on homology in all degreesÃ∏= 1. But in degree 1 the target has vanishing
homology becauseT‚àí2 acts both as 0 and as an isomorphism. It follows that the fiber of this map
identifies with (H1HH(A))[1], giving the required construction.‚ñ°
Finally, in order to segue into the next lecture, we explain a categorical reinterpretation of this
Hochschild homology HH(X) in the case whereXis compact (proper over‚àó). In fact, we will see
in this case that HH(X) only depends on the‚àû-categoryC X, tensored over our base symmetric
monoidal‚àû-categoryC ‚àó =D(Liq p).
More precisely, we will implicitly fix a cut-off cardinal in our condensed world, so that all our
‚àû-categories are presentable. Then our ambient setting will be
ModC‚àó(PrL).
Here Pr L is the‚àû-category of presentable‚àû-categories, with morphisms given by the colimit-
preserving functors, or equivalently those which admit a right adjoint. This Pr L is a symmetric
monoidal‚àû-category with respect to Lurie‚Äôs tensor product, which is characterized by the fact
that maps
C ‚äó D ‚Üí E
in PrL are the same as functors
C √ó D ‚Üí E
which preserve colimits in each variable separately. Moreover Pr L admits all colimits, and the
tensor product on Pr L preserves colimits in each variable. Note finally thatC ‚àó is a commutative
algebra object in this symmetric monoidal‚àû-category Pr L, because of the liquid tensor product
onC ‚àó which commutes with colimits in each variable. Thus Mod C‚àó(PrL) is defined, and is itself
symmetric monoidal, via relative tensor product overC ‚àó.
As an example of a tensor product calculation in Mod C‚àó(PrL) (valid more generally withC ‚àó
replaced by any commutative algebra object in Pr L), suppose given two algebrasAandBinC ‚àó.
Then Mod A(C‚àó),Mod B(C‚àó)‚ààMod C‚àó(PrL), and we have
ModA(C‚àó)‚äó C‚àó ModB(C‚àó)‚âÉMod A‚äóB(C‚àó),
see [Lur17, Remark 4.8.5.17].
We can use this basic fact to prove the following.
Lemma14.15.LetXandYbe complex analytic spaces. Then
CX ‚äóC‚àó CY
‚àº‚ÜíC X√óY .
14. LECTURE XIV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART I 135
Proof.IfX=M(A) is affinoid, thenC X√óY ‚âÉMod A(CY ) and the claim follows as in the
previous remarks. Now supposeXis quasiaffinoid, inside an affinoidM(A) with closed complement
given by the idempotent algebraB‚ààMod A. The localization sequence
ModB
i‚àó
‚ÜíMod A
j‚àó
‚ÜíC X
isC ‚àó-linear, and the left adjoints are alsoC ‚àó-linear. It then follows from the symmetric monoidal
(‚àû,2)-category structure of Mod C‚àó(PrL) that‚àí ‚äó C‚àó CY sends this localization sequence to another
such localization sequence, see [HSS17], and combining again with the remarks about tensoring
with module categories this implies the claim. For generalX, by descent we have that in Cat ‚àû the
pullback functors give
CX = lim‚Üê ‚àíU‚äÇX
CU ,
whereU‚äÇXruns over all quasi-affinoid open subsets ofX. As the pullback functors along open
inclusions have left adjoints which areC ‚àó-linear by the projection formula, this gives
CX = lim‚àí ‚ÜíU‚äÇX
CU
in Mod C‚àó(PrL), via left adjoint to pullback, see [Lur09, 5.5.3.18]. In this manner we reduce the
general case to the quasi-affinoid case, giving the result.‚ñ°
Now we can give the promised categorified interpretation of HH(X) forXproper. This is
based on the concept of ‚Äúdimension‚Äù of a dualizable object in a symmetric monoidal‚àû-category.
Ifc‚àà C ‚äó is dualizable, then by definition we have
dim(c) =

1‚Üíc‚äóc ‚à® ‚Üí1

‚ààEnd C(1).
Here 1 is the unit object ofC, the first map is the coevaluation for the duality, and the second map
is the evaluation for the duality.
In our case, whereC= Mod C‚àó(PrL), we have
EndC(1) =C ‚àó,
or more precisely the anima of objects ofC ‚àó, so given a dualizable objectMof Mod C‚àó(PrL) we get
an object
dim(M)‚ààC ‚àó.
Then the result is the following.
Theorem14.16.LetXbe a proper complex manifold with boundary. Then there is a natural
identification
dim(CX) = HH(X).
Proof.We claim thatC X is canonically self-dual as an object of Mod C‚àó(PrL), with coevalu-
ation map given by pull-push along
‚àó ‚ÜêX ‚àÜ‚ÜíX√óX,
and evaluation map given by pull-push along
X√óX ‚àÜ‚ÜêX‚Üí ‚àó.
Here we use thatC X√óX =C X ‚äóC X by the previous lemma to correctly interpret these maps
as candidate evaluation and coevaluation maps. To prove these give a duality datum, we just
136 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
need to check the adjunction identities, but they follow immediately from the proper base-change
theorem. Composing coevaluation and evaluation we find exactly the definition of HH(X), proving
the identification with the dimension ofC X.‚ñ°
In the next lecture we will be more specific about the functoriality of this identification, and
carry out the rest of the argument for GRR.
Remark14.17.Even ifXis not proper, we still have thatC X is canonically self-dual: one just
uses proper pushforward instead of usual pushforward in the push-pull formalism. The conclusion
in that case is that dim(C X) identifies with thecompactly supportedcohomology ofHH(X).
15. LECTURE XV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART II 137
15. Lecture XV: Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch, part II
This is the final lecture of the course. The goal is to finish the proof of the (Grothendieck‚Äì
)Hirzebruch‚ÄìRiemann‚ÄìRoch theorem for compact complex manifolds. Given the work done in the
previous lecture, this naturally splits into two pieces:
(1) For any compact complex manifoldX, construct the (extended) Chern character
ech :K 0(Perf(X))‚ÜíH 0HH(X) ‚àº= H0Hdg(X)
as a map of contravariant functors from compact complex manifolds to rings, and show
that after restriction along the natural mapK 0(Vect(X))‚ÜíK 0(Perf(X)) it agrees with
the Chern character ch defined in the last lecture.
(2) For any mapf:X‚ÜíYof compact complex manifolds, show that the diagram
K0(Perf(X))
td(TX)¬∑ ech //
f‚àó

H0Hdg(X)
f‚àó

K0(Perf(Y))
td(TY )¬∑ ech // H0Hdg(Y)
commutes.
For the first part, we will need to study the functoriality of the association taking any dualizable
C‚ààMod C‚àó(PrL) to the (relative) Hochschild homology HH(C) := HH(C/C ‚àó). HereC ‚àó =D(Liq p)
(or rather, a truncated version for some fixedŒ∫). This discussion actually works more generally
in symmetric monoidal (‚àû,2)-categoriesM; for usMwill be Mod C‚àó(PrL). A detailed discussion
of this functoriality is in the work of Hoyois‚ÄìScherotzke‚ÄìSibilla [HSS17]. We note that we can
actually get by with the same constructions for symmetric monoidal 2-categories (ignoring all
higher morphisms).
Recall thatX‚ààMis dualizable if there is some objectX ‚à® ‚ààM, a coevaluation mapc: 1‚Üí
X‚äóX ‚à®, and an evaluation mapd:X ‚à® ‚äóX‚Üí1, such that the composites
X c‚äó1‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíX‚äóX‚à® ‚äóX 1‚äód‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíX
and
X ‚à® 1‚äóc‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíX‚à® ‚äóX‚äóX ‚à® d‚äó1‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíX‚à®
are equal (via implicit invertible 2-morphisms) to the identity. In this caseX ‚à® is necessarily the
internal Hom fromXto 1; in fact, for allY, the internal Hom fromXtoYis given byX ‚à® ‚äóY.
Now given any endomorphismf:X‚ÜíX, one can define an endomorphism of 1 inMas the
composite
trM(f|X) := (1 c‚àí ‚ÜíX‚äóX‚à® f‚äó1
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíX‚äóX‚à® d‚àí ‚Üí1)‚ààEndM(1).
This gives a natural functor of (‚àû,1)-categories
trM(‚àí|X) : End M(X)‚ÜíEnd M(1).
In particular, this can be applied to the identityf= id X, giving
dimM(X)‚ààEnd M(1).
An important property of the trace construction is its cyclic invariance. This mirrors the
property tr(AB) = tr(BA) for matrices. In this abstract situation, assume given dualizableX, Y‚àà
138 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
Mand mapsa:X‚ÜíYandb:Y‚ÜíX. Letf=ba:X‚ÜíXandg=ab:Y‚ÜíYbe the induced
endomorphisms. Then there is an isomorphism
trM(f|X) ‚àº= trM(g|Y)
defined by the following diagram
1
cX // X‚äóX ‚à®
a‚äób‚à®
&&
f‚äó1 // X‚äóX ‚à® dX // 1
1
cY // Y‚äóY ‚à® g‚äó1 // Y‚äóY ‚à® dY // 1.
Now we want to analyze the functoriality of dim M(X) inX. It will be useful to study more
generally the functoriality of trM(f|X). Assume given dualizableX, Y‚ààMand a mapF:X‚ÜíY
that admits a right adjointG:Y‚ÜíXinM. (Recall that the theory of adjoints works in the
generality of 2-categories, or more generally (‚àû,2)-categories ‚Äì it is a morphism in the opposite
direction together with unit and counit transformations making some obvious diagrams commute.
Adjoints are unique (up to unique isomorphism) when they exist.) Moreover, consider a diagram
X F //
f

Y
g

X F // Y
(with an implicit 2-morphism, which actually does not need to be invertible ‚Äì it can be any map
in the directionF f‚ÜígF). Then one gets an induced map
trM(f|X)‚Üítr M(f GF|X) ‚àº= trM(F f G|Y)‚Üítr M(gF G|Y)‚Üítr M(g|Y).
In [HSS17], it is shown that this gives in particular a symmetric monoidal functor of symmetric
monoidal (‚àû,1)-categories
dimM :M dual ‚ÜíEnd M(1)
whereM dual ‚äÇMis the sub-(‚àû,1)-category whose objects are the dualizable objects ofM, and
whose morphisms are those morphisms that admit right adjoints (and whose 2-morphisms are
equivalences). As stated before, we will actually only require the version of this result that ignores
n-morphisms forn >2.
Now for any proper mapœÄ:X‚ÜíYof complex-analytic spaces, the pullback functor
œÄ‚àó :C Y ‚ÜíC X
admits a right adjointœÄ ‚àó which satisfies the projection formula, and thus indeed defines a mor-
phism inM= Mod C‚àó(PrL). In particular, using also Lemma 14.15 and the dualizability (in fact
selfduality) ofC X, the functorX7‚ÜíC X gives a symmetric monoidal functor from the category of
compact complex manifolds toM dual. Composing with Hochschild homology, we get a contravariant
symmetric monoidal functor
X7‚ÜíHH(X)‚àà D(Liq p).
(Let us stress again that since many lectures, all liquid vector spaces are overC, notR.) Moreover,
Theorem 14.14 shows that, as a symmetric monoidal functor, this is isomorphic to
X7‚ÜíHdg(X),
15. LECTURE XV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART II 139
giving the symmetric monoidal comparison isomorphismŒ≤: HH(X) ‚àº= Hdg(X).
Finally, we can discuss the construction of the refined Chern character
ech :K 0(Perf(X))‚ÜíH 0HH(X) ‚àº= H0Hdg(X).
Indeed, givenE‚ààPerf(X), we get the functor‚àí‚äó CE:C ‚àó ‚ÜíC X, whose right adjointRŒì(X,‚àí‚äó OX
E‚à®) :C X ‚ÜíC ‚àó is alsoC ‚àó-linear. In particular, it induces a mapC= HH(C ‚àó)‚ÜíHH(X), and we
let
ech(E)‚ààH 0HH(X)
be the image of 1‚ààCunder this map.
Proposition15.1.For a cofiber sequenceE ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíE‚ÜíE ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ inPerf(X), one has
ech(E) = ech(E‚Ä≤) +ech(E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤)‚ààH 0HH(X).
Proof.LetS 2(CX) be theC ‚àó-linear presentable stable‚àû-category of cofiber sequenceA ‚Ä≤ ‚Üí
A‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ inC X. It comes with three projections toC X, given respectively byA ‚Ä≤,A, andA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤, and
the given cofiber sequence induces a functorC ‚àó ‚ÜíS 2(CX) inM dual. It suffices to see that the
projectionsS 2(CX)‚ÜíC X given byA ‚Ä≤ andA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ induce an isomorphism
HH(S2(CX)) ‚àº= HH(CX)‚äïHH(C X)
under which the map HH(S 2(CX))‚ÜíHH(C X) induced by the projection toAis given by the sum
map. The second claim actually follows from the first, using the natural splittingC X √óC X ‚Üí
S2(CX) given by split cofiber sequences.
For the first claim, it suffices to see that the inclusionC X ‚ÜíS 2(CX) given byA ‚Ä≤ 7‚Üí(A ‚Ä≤ ‚Üí
A‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0) and the projection (A ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤)7‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ induce a cofiber sequence
HH(CX)‚ÜíHH(S 2(CX))‚ÜíHH(C X).
But the identity endofunctor id S2(CX) :S 2(CX)‚ÜíS 2(CX) naturally sits in a cofiber sequence
((A‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤)7‚Üí(A ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤ ‚Üí0))‚Üíid S2(CX) ‚Üí((A ‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤)7‚Üí(0‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ ‚ÜíA ‚Ä≤‚Ä≤))
which induces a cofiber sequence after applying tr(‚àí|S 2(CX)). Using cyclic symmetry of the trace,
one can identify the first term with the trace of the identity onC X, and similarly for the last term,
and this gives the desired result.‚ñ°
Thus, we get the desired map
ech :K 0(Perf(X))‚ÜíH 0HH(X) ‚àº= H0Hdg(X),
and it follows from the construction that it is a contravariant map of rings.
Proposition15.2.The restriction of echalongK 0(Vect(X))‚ÜíK 0(Perf(X))agrees with the
Chern characterch.
Proof.By the splitting principle and Proposition 15.1, it suffices to check this on the class of
line bundles. One can now make an argument using the classifying stack [‚àó/G m], and computing
its Hodge cohomology to beC[[c 1]]; but this really requires the‚àû-categorical functoriality of ech.
We give a more ad hoc argument below.
We first observe that ifZ‚äÇXis a closed submanifold with coherent ideal sheafI‚äÇ O X, then
one can look at the full subcategoryC X‚àíZ ofC X of all objects whose reduction moduloIvanishes;
ifZwould be a Cartier divisor, this would amount to algebraically invertingI. ThenC X‚àíZ is still
140 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
dualizable in Mod C‚àó(PrL), and still satisfies a Hochschild‚ÄìKostant‚ÄìRosenberg theorem. For any
vector bundleFonX, the mapRŒì(X, F)‚ÜíRŒì(X‚àíZ, F) is an isomorphism in degrees less than
codim(Z‚äÇX)‚àí1.
Now given a line bundleLonX, consider the projective space eX=P X(LN ‚äï O N
X) for some
largeN. This containsP X(LN) ‚àº= X√óP N‚àí1 andP X(ON
X) ‚àº= X√óP N‚àí1; letZ‚äÇ eXbe their
disjoint union. Away fromZ, there are two projection maps toP N‚àí1, and the pullback ofLto
eX‚àíZ(i.e. toC eX‚àíZ ) is isomorphic to the ratio of the pullbacks of the corresponding line bundles
OPN‚àí1 (1). Also, the pullback mapH 0Hdg(X)‚ÜíH 0Hdg(eX‚àíZ) is injective ifNis chosen large
enough. All of this reduces us to the case of the line bundleO PN‚àí1 (1).
NowH 0Hdg(PN‚àí1) ‚àº= C[c1]/cN
1 wherec 1 =c 1(O(1)). It follows that ech(O(1)) is given by some
truncated power series inc 1(O(1)). In fact, these truncated power series are compatible under
pullback, giving a formula ech(O(1)) =f(c 1(O(1))) for somef‚ààC[[t]]. Computing forP 1, one
checks thatf(t)‚â°1 +tmodulot 2. On the other hand, ech is multiplicative, and using this on
(PN‚àí1)2 along withc 1(L ‚äó L‚Ä≤) =c 1(L) +c 1(L‚Ä≤), we get
f(t+t ‚Ä≤) =f(t)f(t)‚ààC[[t, t ‚Ä≤]].
This means thatf(t) = exp(Œªt) for someŒª‚ààC, which (byf(t)‚â°1 +tmodulot 2) must be given
byŒª= 1. ‚ñ°
This finishes the first part. It remains to prove the following theorem.
Theorem15.3.For any mapf:X‚ÜíYof compact complex manifolds, the diagram
K0(Perf(X))
td(TX)¬∑ ech //
f‚àó

H0Hdg(X)
f‚àó

K0(Perf(Y))
td(TY )¬∑ ech // H0Hdg(Y)
commutes.
In fact, given the definition of ech, this naturally splits into two diagrams. Note that any map
f:X‚ÜíYof compact complex manifolds is a local complete intersection (by factoring it via the
graph) and hence the right adjointf ! :C Y ‚ÜíC X tof ‚àó :C X ‚ÜíC Y is given byf !OY ‚äóOX f ‚àó, and
in particular isC ‚àó-linear. Thus,f ‚àó induces a covariant functoriality on Hochschild homology.
Proposition15.4.For any mapf:X‚ÜíYof compact complex manifolds, the diagram
K0(Perf(X))
ech //
f‚àó

H0HH(X)
f‚àó

K0(Perf(Y))
ech // H0HH(Y)
commutes.
Proof.This is a formal consequence of the functoriality of Hochschild homology. Indeed,
take anyE‚ààPerf(X). Going via the upper right corner, one gets the element ofH 0HH(Y)
15. LECTURE XV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART II 141
corresponding to the effect on Hochschild homology of the functor
C‚àó
‚àí‚äóCE
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíCX
f‚àó
‚àí ‚ÜíCY .
But by the projection formula, this functor agrees with
C‚àó
‚àí‚äóCf‚àóE
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíCY ,
whose effect on Hochschild homology gives the element ofH 0HH(Y) one obtains when going via
the left lower corner. ‚ñ°
Thus, it remains to prove the following result.
Proposition15.5.For any mapf:X‚ÜíYof compact complex manifolds, the diagram
HH(X)
td(TX)¬∑//
f‚àó

Hdg(X)
f‚àó

HH(Y)
td(TY )¬∑// Hdg(Y)
commutes (up to equivalence), where the upper maps are the HKR isomorphisms multiplied with
the Todd class.
To prove this, we will actually pass to an abstraction, as follows.
Definition15.6.Consider the category Man of compact complex manifolds, and let (S,‚äó) be
a symmetric monoidal 1-category.
(1) An abstractS-valued cohomology theory on Man is a contravariant symmetric monoidal
functor
H ‚àó : Manop ‚ÜíS
that takes disjoint unions to products, and about which we ask the following weak form
of the projective bundle formula: For anyX‚ààMan and any vector bundleEof positive
rank onX, the pullback map
H ‚àó(X)‚ÜíH ‚àó(PX(E))
is a monomorphism.
(2) LetH ‚àó be an abstractS-valued cohomology theory on Man. A pushforward structure on
H ‚àó is a covariant functor
H‚àó : Man‚ÜíS
with an identification
H‚àó|Man‚âÉ ‚àº= H ‚àó|Man‚âÉ
to the subcategory Man ‚âÉ ‚äÇMan of all objects, but only isomorphisms as morphisms,
subject to the following conditions:
(a) For any transverse pullback square
X ‚Ä≤ g‚Ä≤
//
f ‚Ä≤

X
f

Y ‚Ä≤ g // Y,
142 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
one has
g‚àóf‚àó =f ‚Ä≤
‚àóg‚Ä≤‚àó :H ‚àó(X)‚ÜíH ‚àó(Y ‚Ä≤),
where we denoteg ‚àó =H ‚àó(g) andf ‚àó =H ‚àó(f), etc.
(b) For any mapf:X‚ÜíYand anyZ, the map
(f√óid Z)‚àó :H ‚àó(X√óZ) =H ‚àó(X)‚äóH ‚àó(Z)‚ÜíH ‚àó(Y√óZ) =H ‚àó(Y)‚äóH ‚àó(Z)
agrees withf ‚àó ‚äóH ‚àó(Z).
(c) Moreover, we ask a weak form of the projective bundle formula: for anyXand line
bundleLonX, the map
H ‚àó(PX(L‚äï1))
(œÄ‚àó,‚àû‚àó)
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíH‚àó(X)√óH ‚àó(X)
is a monomorphism.
Example15.7.We will takeSto beD(Liq p), the derived 1-category ofp-liquidC-vector spaces.
(In fact, everything will take place inD(C)‚äÇD(Liq p).) We have two pushforward structures on
H ‚àó = HH ‚àº= Hdg: The first by the covariant functoriality of Hochschild homology, and the second
as constructed in the last lecture, using Serre duality.
Remark15.8.If (H ‚àó, H‚àó) is any abstract cohomology theory with pushforwards, one gets a
version of the projection formula. Namely, for any mapf:X‚ÜíYand classesx‚ààH ‚àó(X) and
y‚ààH ‚àó(Y) (wherex‚ààH ‚àó(X) is meant to be read asx: 1 S ‚ÜíH ‚àó(X)), one has
f‚àóx¬∑y=f ‚àó(x¬∑f ‚àóy).
The product used here is defined as the composite of pullback to the diagonal and the exterior
product (coming from the symmetric monoidal structure ofH ‚àó). Thus
f‚àóx¬∑y= ‚àÜ ‚àó
Y (f‚àóx‚äóy) = ‚àÜ ‚àó
Y (f√óid Y )‚àó(x‚äóy)
using condition (b). On the other hand
f‚àó(x¬∑f ‚àóy) =f ‚àó‚àÜ‚àó
X(x‚äóf ‚àóy) =f ‚àó‚àÜ‚àó
X(idX √óf) ‚àó(x‚äóy)
by the symmetric monoidal nature ofH ‚àó in the second equation. Finally, the result follows from
the transverse pullback square
X
(idX ,f)//
f

X√óY
f√óid Y

Y
‚àÜY // Y√óY.
Remark15.9.Given any abstract cohomology theory with pushforward (H ‚àó, H‚àó), one can
define some rudimentary theory of characteristic classes. We will only require Euler classes of
line bundles: IfLis a line bundle onX, letP X(L‚à® ‚äï1) be the projective space overXthat
compactifies theA 1-bundle corresponding toLinto aP 1-bundle. It comes with a zero section
0 :X‚ÜíP X(L‚à® ‚äï1), and we set
e(L) = 0‚àó0‚àó(1)‚ààH ‚àó(X).
15. LECTURE XV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART II 143
Example15.10.In Hodge cohomology, the Euler class of a line bundle is given by its first
Chern classc 1. In Hochschild homology, the Euler class is given by 1‚àíe ‚àíc1. Indeed, using the
pushforward compatibility of 0 ‚àó with the Chern character, 0 ‚àó(1) comes from the perfect complex
that is given by the zero section, which is resolved by the structure sheaf and the ideal sheaf of the
zero section. The first corresponds to 1, the second corresponds toO(‚àí1), whose Chern character
ise ‚àíc1.
Note that in the previous example, one precisely sees a discrepancy ofc 1 versus 1‚àíe ‚àíc1, getting
us close to the definition of the Todd class.
Remark15.11.Let (H ‚àó, H‚àó) be an abstract cohomology theory with a pushforward structure.
Assume thatt:K 0(Vect(X))‚ÜíH ‚àó(X) √ó is a contravariant natural transformation from the
additive groupK 0(Vect(X)) to the multiplicative group of units of the ringH ‚àó(X) (i.e. maps 1 S ‚Üí
H ‚àó(X) that admit a map 1 S ‚ÜíH ‚àó(X) that is a multiplicative inverse underH ‚àó(X)‚äóH ‚àó(X) ‚àº=
H ‚àó(X√óX)
‚àÜ‚àó
X
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíH‚àó(X)). Then one can definet-twisted pushforward mapsf t
‚àó =t(T Y )‚àí1f‚àót(TX)
forf:X‚ÜíY, and it is easy to see that this is still a pushforward structure.
The previous discussion then shows that it is enough to prove the following abstract result.
Theorem15.12.Let(H ‚àó, H‚àó)and(H ‚Ä≤‚àó, H‚Ä≤
‚àó)be two abstractS-valued cohomology theories with
pushforward structures, and letŒ±:H ‚àó ‚ÜíH ‚Ä≤‚àó be a map of abstractS-valued cohomology theories.
Assume thatŒ±is compatible with Euler classes of line bundles, i.e. for anyXand any line bundle
LonX, one hasŒ±(e(L)) =e ‚Ä≤(L).
ThenŒ±commutes with all pushforward maps.
Proof.First, we note that given any such (H ‚àó, H‚àó), there is a natural self-duality ofH ‚àó(X)‚àà
S, given by the coevaluation
1S =H ‚àó(‚àó)
œÄ‚àó
X
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíH‚àó(X)
‚àÜX‚àó
‚àí ‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíH‚àó(X√óX) ‚àº= H ‚àó(X)‚äóH ‚àó(X)
and evaluation
H ‚àó(X)‚äóH ‚àó(X) =H ‚àó(X√óX)
‚àÜ‚àó
X
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíH‚àó(X)
œÄX‚àó
‚àí ‚àí ‚ÜíH‚àó(‚àó) = 1S.
Moreover, with respect to this self-duality (which depends on the pushforward structure), the
mapsf ‚àó :H ‚àó(X)‚ÜíH ‚àó(Y) are the duals off ‚àó :H ‚àó(Y)‚ÜíH ‚àó(X). In particular, to show thatŒ±
commutes with the pushforward maps, it is enough to show that it commutes with the self-dualities,
for which in turn it is enough to show that it is compatible with the coevaluation maps (as these
determine the self-duality). Thus, it suffices to show that
Œ±(‚àÜX‚àó(1)) = ‚àÜ‚Ä≤
X‚àó(1).
AsH ‚àó takes disjoint unions to products, we can assume thatXis connected.
We will now show more generally that for any closed immersioni:Z ,‚ÜíXof compact complex
manifolds (of codimensionc), one hasŒ±(i ‚àó(1)) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àó(1). Consider first the case whereZis of
codimensionc= 1. In that case, we can define the line bundleL=O X(Z), which comes with
a natural sections:X‚ÜíLvanishing exactly alongZ, and 0 :X‚ÜíL. In particular, we get a
144 CONDENSED MATHEMATICS AND COMPLEX GEOMETRY
transverse pullback square
Z i //
i

X
s

X 0 // PX(L‚à® ‚äï OX).
Now note thats ‚àó = 0‚àó :H ‚àó(X)‚ÜíH ‚àó(PX(L‚à® ‚äï OX)): By the weak form of the projective bundle
formula we asked for, it suffices to check this after pushing forward toX(where it follows assand
0 are both sections) and pulling back to‚àû(where it follows from the transverse pullback formula,
and the emptiness of the intersection with‚àû). Thus,
i‚àó(1) = 0‚àós‚àó(1) = 0‚àó0‚àó(1) =e(L),
and the claim follows from compatibility with Euler classes.
Note that if we knowŒ±(i ‚àó(1)) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àó(1) for somei:Z‚äÇX, then in fact for allz‚ààH ‚àó(Z) in the
image ofi ‚àó :H ‚àó(X)‚ÜíH ‚àó(Z), one hasŒ±(i ‚àó(z)) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àó(Œ±(z)). Indeed, ifz=i ‚àó(x), then
Œ±(i‚àó(z)) =Œ±(i ‚àó(i‚àó(x))) =Œ±(i ‚àó(1)¬∑x) =Œ±(i ‚àó(1))¬∑Œ±(x) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àó(1)¬∑Œ±(x) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àói‚Ä≤‚àó(Œ±(x)) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àóŒ±(z)
using the compatibility ofŒ±with pullback and multiplication.
Next, consider the situation of a vector bundleEof rankron a compact complex manifold
X, and the embedding of the zero section 0 :X ,‚ÜíP X(E‚à® ‚äï O X). We want to show that
Œ±(0‚àó(1)) = 0‚Ä≤
‚àó(1). By the splitting principle, we can assume thatEadmits a complete flag
0 =E 0 ‚äÇE 1 ‚äÇ. . .‚äÇE r =E.
In that case, one can factor
X=P X(OX)‚äÇP X(E‚à®
1 ‚äï OX)‚äÇ. . .‚äÇP X(E‚à®
r ‚äï OX) =P X(E‚à® ‚äï OX)
into a series of codimension 1 embeddings. Moreover, the corresponding line bundles
OPX(E‚à®
i ‚äïOX)(PX(E‚à®
i‚àí1 ‚äï OX))
onP X(E‚à®
i ‚äï OX) lift toP X(E‚à® ‚äï OX) (they are twists ofO(1) by the pullback of the line bundle
Ei/Ei‚àí1 onX). Thus, the result can be inductively reduced to the case of codimension 1.
Finally, we consider the general casei:Z ,‚ÜíX. The following argument is inspired by an
argument in [Ful98, Chapter 15]. LetDbe the blow-up ofX√óP 1 alongZ√ó {0}. Then there is a
projectionD‚ÜíP 1 with a mapei:Z√óP 1 ,‚ÜíDoverP 1, which after pullback toP 1 \ {0}becomes
isomorphic to (Z ,‚ÜíX)√ó(P 1 \ {0}), while after pullback to 0‚ààP 1, we get
Z ,‚ÜíP Z(N ‚à® ‚äï1),‚ÜíD√ó P1 {0}
whereNis the normal bundle ofZinX, and the second map is an inclusion of an irreducible
component, where the other irreducible component does not meetZ.
Leti Z,1 :Z=Z√ó {1},‚ÜíZ√óP 1 andi Z,0 :Z=Z√ó {0},‚ÜíZ√óP 1 be the inclusions. Then
iZ,0‚àó(1) =i Z,1‚àó(1) =e(O(1)). Also consideri X,1 :X=X√ó {1},‚ÜíDandi 0 :P Z(N ‚à® ‚äï1),‚ÜíD
and 0 :Z ,‚ÜíP Z(N ‚à® ‚äï1). Then
iX,1‚àói‚àó(1) =ei‚àóiZ,1‚àó(1) =ei‚àóiZ,0‚àó(1) =i 0‚àó0‚àó(1).
In particular,
Œ±(iX,1‚àói‚àó(1)) =Œ±(i 0‚àó0‚àó(1)) =i ‚Ä≤
0‚àóŒ±(0‚àó(1)) =i ‚Ä≤
0‚àó0‚Ä≤
‚àó(1)
15. LECTURE XV: HIRZEBRUCH‚ÄìRIEMANN‚ÄìROCH, PART II 145
by the codimension 1 case and embedding of the zero section case handled before (and noting that
0‚àó(1) is in the image ofi ‚àó
0, as it is in facti ‚àó
0 applied toei‚àó(1)).
Now we observe that also
i‚Ä≤
X,1‚àóŒ±(i‚àó(1)) =Œ±(i X,1‚àói‚àó(1))
using the codimension 1 case fori X,1 (and again noting thati ‚àó(1) is in the image ofi ‚àó
X,1, again
when applied toei‚àó(1)), and
i‚Ä≤
X,1‚àói‚Ä≤
‚àó(1) =i ‚Ä≤
0‚àó0‚Ä≤
‚àó(1)
as we proved the similar assertion for the unprimed version before. In total, we get
i‚Ä≤
X,1‚àóŒ±(i‚àó(1)) =Œ±(i X,1‚àói‚àó(1)) =i ‚Ä≤
0‚àó0‚Ä≤
‚àó(1) =i ‚Ä≤
X,1‚àói‚Ä≤
‚àó(1).
Buti ‚Ä≤
X,1‚àó is a (split) monomorphism (asiX,1 :X ,‚ÜíDadmits a splitting), so we getŒ±(i ‚àó(1)) =i ‚Ä≤
‚àó(1),
as desired. ‚ñ°
Bibliography
[Ami64] D. Amir,Projections onto continuous functions spaces, Proc. Am. Math. Soc.15(1964), 396‚Äì402.
[And21] G. Andreychev,Pseudocoherent and Perfect Complexes and Vector Bundles on Analytic Adic Spaces,
arXiv:2105.12591, 2021.
[ASC+16] A. Avil ÃÅ es, F. C. S ÃÅ anchez, J. M. F. Castillo, M. Gonz ÃÅ alez, and Y. Moreno,Separably injective Banach
spaces, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 2132, Springer, [Cham], 2016.
[BBBK18] F. Bambozzi, O. Ben-Bassat, and K. Kremnizer,Stein domains in Banach algebraic geometry, J. Funct.
Anal.274(2018), no. 7, 1865‚Äì1927.
[BBK17] O. Ben-Bassat and K. Kremnizer,Non-Archimedean analytic geometry as relative algebraic geometry,
Ann. Fac. Sci. Toulouse Math. (6)26(2017), no. 1, 49‚Äì126.
[BBT18] B. Bakker, Y. Brunebarbe, and J. Tsimerman,o-minimal GAGA and a conjecture of Griffiths,
arXiv:1811.12230, 2018.
[Ber90] V. G. Berkovich,Spectral theory and analytic geometry over non-Archimedean fields, Math. Surv. Monogr.,
vol. 33, Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1990.
[BF11] P. Balmer and G. Favi,Generalized tensor idempotents and the telescope conjecture, Proc. Lond. Math.
Soc. (3)102(2011), no. 6, 1161‚Äì1185.
[Bin78] J. Bingener,  ÃàUber formale komplexe R Ãà aume, Manuscripta Math.24(1978), no. 3, 253‚Äì293.
[BKS20] P. Balmer, H. Krause, and G. Stevenson,The frame of smashing tensor-ideals, Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc.168(2020), no. 2, 323‚Äì343.
[Cem84] P. Cembranos,C(K, E)contains a complemented copy ofc 0, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.91(1984), no. 4,
556‚Äì558.
[Fri67] J. Frisch,Points de platitude d‚Äôun morphisme d‚Äôespaces analytiques complexes, Invent. Math.4(1967),
118‚Äì138.
[Ful98] W. Fulton,Intersection theory, second ed., Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge.
A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A
Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics], vol. 2, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1998.
[GK00] E. Grosse-Kl Ãà onne,Rigid analytic spaces with overconvergent structure sheaf, Journal f Ãà ur die reine und
angewandte Mathematik519(2000), 73‚Äì95.
[Gle58] A. M. Gleason,Projective topological spaces, Illinois J. Math.2(1958), 482‚Äì489.
[Gro55] A. Grothendieck,Produits tensoriels topologiques et espaces nucl ÃÅ eaires, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc.No. 16
(1955), Chapter 1: 196 pp.; Chapter 2: 140.
[Gro58] Alexander Grothendieck,La th ÃÅ eorie des classes de chern, Bulletin de la soci ÃÅ et ÃÅ e math ÃÅ ematique de France
86(1958), 137‚Äì154.
[Gro61] ,  ÃÅEl ÃÅ ements de g ÃÅ eom ÃÅ etrie alg ÃÅ ebrique: III.  ÃÅ etude cohomologique des faisceaux coh ÃÅ erents, premi` ere
partie, Publications Math ÃÅ ematiques de l‚ÄôIH ÃÅES11(1961), 5‚Äì167.
[HBS66] Friedrich Hirzebruch, Armand Borel, and RLE Schwarzenberger,Topological methods in algebraic geome-
try, vol. 175, Springer Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1966.
[Hou73] C. Houzel,Espaces analytiques relatifs et th ÃÅ eor` eme de finitude, Math. Ann.205(1973), 13‚Äì54.
[HSS17] Marc Hoyois, Sarah Scherotzke, and Nicolo Sibilla,Higher traces, noncommutative motives, and the cat-
egorified chern character, Advances in Mathematics309(2017), 97‚Äì154.
[Hub93] R. Huber,Continuous valuations, Math. Z.212(1993), no. 3, 455‚Äì477.
[Kal81] N. J. Kalton,Convexity, type and the three space problem, Studia Math.69(1980/81), no. 3, 247‚Äì287.
147
148 BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Lan77] K. Langmann,Zum Satz von J. Frisch: ‚ÄúPoints de platitude d‚Äôun morphisme d‚Äôespaces analytiques com-
plexes‚Äù (Invent. Math.4(1967), 118‚Äì138), Math. Ann.229(1977), no. 2, 141‚Äì142.
[Loj64] S. Lojasiewicz,Triangulation of semi-analytic sets, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa Cl. Sci. (3)18(1964),
449‚Äì474. MR 173265
[Lur09] J. Lurie,Higher topos theory, Annals of Mathematics Studies, vol. 170, Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, NJ, 2009.
[Lur17] ,Higher Algebra,https://www.math.ias.edu/ ~lurie/papers/HA.pdf, 2017.
[Mao21] Z. Mao,Revisiting derived crystalline cohomology, arXiv:2107.02921, 2021.
[Mat80] H. Matsumura,Commutative algebra, second ed., Mathematics Lecture Note Series, vol. 56, Ben-
jamin/Cummings Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1980.
[Oka50] K. Oka,Sur les fonctions analytiques de plusieurs variables. VII. Sur quelques notions arithm ÃÅ etiques, Bull.
Soc. Math. France78(1950), 1‚Äì27.
[Ost17] A. Ostrowski,  ÃàUber einige L Ãà osungen der FunktionalgleichungœÜ(x)¬∑œÜ(y) =œÜ(xy)., Acta Math.41(1917),
271‚Äì284.
[Rem84] R. Remmert,Funktionentheorie. I, Grundwissen Mathematik [Basic Knowledge in Mathematics], vol. 5,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1984.
[Sch13] R. Schatten,Norm ideals of completely continuous operators, vol. 27, Springer-Verlag, 2013.
[Sch19] P. Scholze,Lectures on Condensed Mathematics,people.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/scholze/Condensed.pdf,
2019.
[Sch20] ,Lectures on Analytic Geometry,people.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/scholze/Analytic.pdf, 2020.
[Sch26] ,Geometry and Higher Category Theory,https://people.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/scholze/
Gestalten.pdf, 2026.
[Siu69] Y.-T. Siu,Noetherianness of rings of holomorphic functions on Stein compact subsets, Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc.21(1969), 483‚Äì489.
[SS72] G. Scheja and U. Storch,Differentielle Eigenschaften der Lokalisierungen analytischer Algebren, Math.
Ann.197(1972), 137‚Äì170.
[Tay72] J. L. Taylor,A general framework for a multi-operator functional calculus, Advances in Math.9(1972),
183‚Äì252.
[Ull99] P. Ullrich,Division mit Rest in Banach-Algebren konvergenter Potenzreihen, Arch. Math. (Basel)72
(1999), no. 4, 289‚Äì292.
[Wae06] L. Waelbroeck,Topological vector spaces and algebras, vol. 230, Springer, 2006.