      
REVIEW
Revealing quantum geometry in nonlinear
quantum materials
To cite this article: Yiyang Jiang et al 2025 Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 076502
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
You may also like
(Invited) Probing Correlated Topological
Phases via Nonlinear Hall Effect
Ying Wang
-
Anomalous Transport Induced by Non-
Hermitian Anomalous Berry Connection in
Non-Hermitian Systems
Jiong-Hao Wang,  , Yu-Liang Tao et al.
-
Geodesic Nature and Quantization of Shift
Vector
Hua Wang,  , Kai Chang et al.
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 71.112.207.79 on 16/07/2026 at 21:09
Reports on Progress in Physics
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 (39pp) https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6633/ade454
Review
Revealing quantum geometry in
nonlinear quantum materials
Yiyang Jiang1,2, Tobias Holder 3,∗ and Binghai Yan1,2,∗
1 Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel
2 Department of Physics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States of
America
3 Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
E-mail: tobiasholder@tauex.tau.ac.il and binghai.yan@weizmann.ac.il
Received 16 December 2024, revised 6 March 2025
Accepted for publication 13 June 2025
Published 3 July 2025
Corresponding editor: Dr Georgia Platt
Abstract
Berry curvature-related topological phenomena have been a central topic in condensed matter
physics. Y et, until recently other quantum geometric quantities such as the metric and
connection received only little attention due to the relatively few effects which have been
documented for them. This review gives a modern perspective how quantum geometric
quantities naturally enter the nonlinear responses of quantum materials and demonstrate their
deep connection with excitation energy, lifetimes, symmetry, and corresponding physical
processes. The multitude of nonlinear responses can be subdivided into nonlinear optical
effects, subgap responses, and nonlinear transport phenomena. Such a distinction by energy
scales facilitates an intuitive understanding of the underlying electronic transitions, giving rise
to a unified picture of the electron motion beyond linear order. The well-known injection and
shift currents constitute the main resonances in the optical regime. Exploiting their respective
lifetime and symmetry dependencies, this review elucidates how these resonances can be
distinguished by a corresponding quantum geometric quantity that shares the same symmetry.
This is followed by a brief exposition of the role of quasiparticle lifetimes for nonlinear subgap
responses, which presents a window into the microscopic short-term dynamics as well as the
ground state correlation and localization. We conclude with an account of the anomalous motion
due to the Berry curvature dipole and quantum metric dipole in nonlinear transport, clarifying
the correspondence between physical observables and the underlying mechanisms. This review
highlights the close relationship between quantum geometry and nonlinear response, showing
the way towards promising probes of quantum geometry and enabling novel avenues to
characterize complex materials.
Keywords: Berry curvature , quantum metric, topology, quantum geometry,
nonlinear conductivity
∗
Authors to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
1
© 2025 IOP Publishing Ltd. All rights, including for text and
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Contents
1. Introduction 2
1.1. Overview 2
1.2. Frequency 3
1.3. Lifetime 4
1.4. Symmetry 5
1.5. Experiments 7
1.6. Extrinsic scattering 7
1.7. Structure of the review 7
2. Basic concepts 7
2.1. Quantum geometric quantities 7
2.2. General nonlinear response theory 8
2.3. Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams 8
2.4. Feynman rules 10
2.5. Three regimes in 2nd-order responses 10
3. BPVE 11
3.1. Injection and shift current 11
3.2. Geometric interpretation 12
3.2.1. Formula equivalence 13
3.2.2. Bloch sphere picture 13
3.3. Destructive interference 14
3.4. Symmetry separation 14
3.5. Extrinsic photocurrents 15
4. Finite lifetime and subgap response 15
4.1. Introduction of two lifetimes 15
4.2. Subgap responses 16
5. Nonlinear transport 16
5.1. Berry curvature and quantum metric dipole 17
5.2. Geometric interpretation and quantum anomaly 18
5.3. Beyond semiclassics 18
5.4. Symmetry separation 19
5.5. Extrinsic effects 19
6. Summary 20
Data availability statement 20
Acknowledgments 20
Appendix A. Notations 20
A.1. Conventions for Fourier transforms 20
A.2. Definition of current and conductivity 20
A.3. Continuous and discrete form of
response theory 21
Appendix B. Symmetry of 2nd order optical
conductivity 22
B.1. Intrinsic symmetry 22
B.1.1. Intrinsic permutation
symmetry 22
B.1.2. Conjugation symmetry for
dc-response 22
B.1.3. Transport limit 22
B.2. Linear and circular polarized light 23
B.3. Spacetime transformation and
symmetry 23
B.3.1. Spatial transformation and
symmetry 23
B.3.2. Time reversal
transformation and
symmetry 24
Appendix C. Feynman diagrammatics 25
Appendix D. Comments on nonlinear transport
conductivity 28
D.1. Semiclassical formalism 28
D.1.1. SW transformation 28
D.1.2. Correction of band dispersion 29
D.1.3. Correction of wave
function and Berry
connection 30
D.2. Spacetime transformation and
symmetry 30
D.3. Quantum perturbative approach 31
D.3.1. Expanding velocity vertices 31
D.3.2. Expansion with respect to τ 34
D.3.3. Quantum metric dipole and
in-gap nonlinear Hall
response 35
References 36
1 . Introduction
1 .1 . Overview
Quantum geometry has recently emerged as an efficient tool
to characterize the properties of quantum materials [ 1, 2]. On
one hand, the quantum geometry of a bulk material determ-
ines the intrinsic localization properties of the electronic states,
making it an economic and physically meaningful language
to quantify the charge distribution within the clean bulk solid.
On the other hand, quantum geometry quantifies the geometric
properties such as the distance (quantum metric), area (Berry
curvature), and parallelism (quantum connection) of the Bloch
wavefunction |ψk⟩ in momentum space.
Initially, quantum geometric phenomena have been
explored exclusively in relation to Berry phases and curvature
effects. Indeed, these quantities are nowadays well-understood
as, respectively, measures of the charge polarization [ 3] and
self-rotation of Bloch wavepacket [ 4]. In the early 2000s, the
improved understanding of quantum geometry in terms of the
Berry curvature played a crucial role in the topological clas-
sification of quantum phases beyond Landau’s paradigm [ 5–
10]. Despite these successes, additional geometric quantities
such as the quantum metric [ 11] and the quantum connec-
tion [ 12] are needed for a more complete description of the
adiabatic evolution of the wavefunction in the ground state.
Y et, until very recently these latter quantities have not received
the same amount of attention. Thanks to the progress in the
engineering and characterization of complex bulk materials
as well as layered van-der-Waals (vdWs) heterostructures,
the study of multiorbital systems has propelled the arguably
subtle effects of quantum geometry to the center of atten-
tion: with their many degrees of freedom which can give way
to a large number of interband-coherent processes, these so-
called quantum materials offer an unprecedented and rich phe-
nomenology of correlated phases, light-matter coupling and
transport responses. Importantly, many of these compounds
also feature giant nonlinear responses [ 13]. This review aims
to highlight how and why novel phenomena originating from
2
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
quantum geometry become accessible specifically with the
help of such nonlinear quantum materials.
To set the stage, we can understand the effect of quantum
geometry on the charge current response in two ways. Viewed
from real space, the response of material to an external elec-
tromagnetic field will definitely be affected by the charge dis-
tribution, i.e. it depends on the expectation values of various
moments of the position operator ⟨ψ |ˆr . . .ˆr|ψ ⟩. In momentum
space, the perturbation by an electromagnetic field formally
couples an external electromagnetic vector potential A to
the non-interacting electronic Hamiltonian: ˆH0(k) → ˆH0(k +
e
 ̄h A) by minimal coupling, where k and −e are the momentum
and charge of the electrons. According to response theory,
different orders of charge current response to electromag-
netic field A therefore necessarily involve different orders
of momentum derivatives ∂k . . . ∂k ˆH0, which are related by
sum rules to the momentum derivatives of the wavefunc-
tion ⟨ψk|∂k . . . ∂k|ψk⟩, thus containing geometric information
about the wavefunction in momentum space. These two argu-
ments, though presented from different perspectives, are fun-
damentally connected as position and momentum are conjug-
ate variables in quantum mechanics. However, the argument
above only superficially relates nonlinear response to quantum
geometry. To see in detail how the quantum geometry determ-
ines the response, a case-by-case classification of the nonlinear
response is necessary as different quantum geometric quantit-
ies correspond to different nonlinear phenomena. The primary
purpose of this review is to elucidate this process and the main
outcomes, as summarized in figures 1 and 2 as well as table 1.
Even though the study of nonlinear responses has a long
history dating back to the seventies, the early reviews of the
field [ 68, 69] did not discuss its inherent quantum geomet-
ric nature. More recent reviews [ 13, 70–76] included these
aspects, either focusing solely on optical responses or the non-
linear Hall effect. Here, we aim to highlight how both spa-
tial and temporal (spectral) information form interdependent
physical organizing principles, providing the versatile frame-
work required to capture the behavior of intrinsic nonlinear
conductivities each for resonant, off-resonant and even semi-
classical responses.
1 .2. Frequency
The first key factor in distinguishing different types of nonlin-
ear responses is the perturbation frequency ω, which determ-
ines the nature of the electronic transitions involved. Here
we only focus on monochromatic perturbation and 2nd order
response for simplicity. According to the perturbation fre-
quency ω and its relation with the band gap Eg and electron
lifetime τ , nonlinear response can be classified into three main
regimes. As depicted in figure 2 and row (I) of table 1, these
include firstly nonlinear optics as shown in figures 2(a) and
(b) related to resonant excitations and photocurrent genera-
tion, secondly subgap response as shown in figure 2(c) where
only off-resonant excitations contribute, and finally in non-
linear transport as shown in figures 2(d) and (e), in which
case the quasiparticle decoherence rate τ −1 is larger than the
frequency ω.
Figure 1 . Quantum geometry contains both momentum space band
geometry and information about the charge distribution in real
space. In band geometry, quantum metric (a), Berry curvature (b),
and quantum connection (c) characterize the distance ( l1,2), area
(S1,2), and change of tangent space orientation in Hilbert space
(drawn as a Bloch sphere), respectively. All three geometric
quantities are relevant ingredients for the optical response. In terms
of the quasiparticle motion, quantum metric (a), Berry curvature (b),
and quantum connection (c) can be associated with the deformation
(d), rotation (e) and nontrivial shift (f) of a traveling wavepacket,
respectively. The corresponding anomalous components of the
equations of motion are the quantum metric dipole (d) and Berry
curvature dipole (e), as indicated by red curved arrows, while (f)
does not appear in the intrinsic nonlinear conductivity.
In nonlinear optics, two kinds of responses arise in 2nd
order, second harmonic generation (SHG) which generates
an alternating current (AC) with frequency 2 ω twice the per-
turbation frequency (figure 2(a)), and the bulk photovoltaic
effect (BPVE, also called bulk photogalvanic effect, BPGE)
which describes a direct current (DC) generation (figure 2(b)).
The BPVE can furthermore be separated into the so-called
injection current whose magnitude grows with time, and the
so-called shift current whose magnitude remains finite. Quite
amazingly, already the original resonant response theory of
3
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Figure 2. Nonlinear responses can be subdivided into three main categories: nonlinear optics consisting of (a) second harmonic generation
(SHG) and (b) bulk photovoltaic effect (BPVE), subgap response (c), and nonlinear transport for (d) metal and (e) insulator respectively. In
(a)–(e), red and blue parabolas represent the conduction ( c) and valence ( v) bands, the straight and wavelike arrows represent electronic
transitions and corresponding photon absorption/emission (red/blue) processes, while the shaded area represents the filled valence band
states.
the intrinsic BPVE [ 14, 68, 77–80] correctly captured both
injection and shift contributions for time-reversal symmetric
systems [ 44]. However, the early interpretation of the shift
current as a transient, induced polarization was influenced
majorly by the polar semiconductors which were of interest
at the time. Therefore, it came as a surprise when topolo-
gical materials were later found to have both a giant SHG [ 81,
82] as well as BVPE [ 24–26], leading to a refined under-
standing of the phenomenology [ 27–33] using concepts from
quantum geometry [15, 34–43]. Similar conclusions have been
reached for the injection current driven by circular polar-
ized light [ 16–18], most notably leading to the prediction of
a quantized circular photogalvanic effect for non-interacting
two-band systems [ 19, 20]. In addition to the quantized cir-
cular photogalvanic effect, recent studies have also proposed
a quantized shift current in multigap topological phases [ 83].
Several experiments have been able to resolve the BPVE for
circular polarized light [ 21–23]. Recent progress has shown
that the quantum geometric origin is inherent in all nonlin-
ear optical responses [ 42, 49, 84, 85]. We note that the mag-
nitude of the nonlinear optical response function depends
sensitively on the choice of model and the resulting wave
functions [86, 87].
Regarding the geometric perspective, the injection current
can be related to the quantum metric and Berry curvature of
the system, which measure the length and area in the wave-
function space as shown in figures 1(a) and (b). Similarly, the
shift current has been related to a higher order quantum geo-
metric quantity called quantum connection, which describes
the change in tangential vectors of the wavefunction space as
shown in figure 1(c).
Quantum geometry also manifest in nonlinear transport
when the perturbation frequency ω approaches zero. The
theory of semiclassical transport at nonlinear order is well
developed [51, 88–91]. By their dependencies on lifetime τ ,
nonlinear transport can also be categorized into three different
parts, including the nonlinear Drude (NLD) term which scales
like τ 2 [50–53], the Berry curvature dipole (BCD) which is
linear in τ [50, 54–56], and the (band-normalized) quantum
metric dipole (QMD) term which is independent of τ [62–
65]. The purely dispersion-related NLD term describes the
rigid-body-like movement of wavepacket, while QMD and
BCD terms, which originate from quantum metric and Berry
curvature, describe the deformation and self-rotation of the
wavepacket as shown in figures 1(d) and (e). These geomet-
ric responses have been observed to contribute to the intrinsic
nonreciprocal magnetoresistance [ 66, 67] and the nonlinear
anomalous Hall (NLAH) effect [57–59]. All these three contri-
butions are Fermi surface responses, i.e. they are only nonzero
in metals (figure 2(d)). However, just as the quantum anom-
alous Hall (QAH) at linear order can arise from a completely
filled band, similarly, there exists Fermi sea contribution to the
nonlinear Hall effect in insulators [ 92] (figure 2(e)).
Between these two regimes exists the so-called subgap
regime (figure 2(c)), where the perturbation frequency ω is
smaller than the band gap Eg so that resonant optical transition
can not happen [ 88, 93, 94]. Although off-resonant, the DC
generation does not necessarily vanish entirely inside the gap
of a magnetic insulator [46–49]. Instead, it can pertain its mag-
nitude for an limited window of subgap frequencies, where the
quasiparticle lifetimes play an important role.
1 .3. Lifetime
Besides perturbation frequency, the role of finite lifetime
is also important in separating different parts of nonlinear
responses and unifying three regimes in one unified formal-
ism, as shown in the row (II) of table 1. In nonlinear optics,
the injection part will not grow indefinitely with time in real
materials due to dissipation while the shift part does not expli-
citly depend on it. The time scale for such dissipation is
approximately the quasiparticle lifetime τ . Based on the life-
time dependence, injection ( ∝ τ 1) and shift ( ∝ τ 0) current
can be separated [ 14, 15], as noted in the ‘Nonlinear Optics’
column of table 1. However, this seemingly simple classifica-
tion does not fully account for the fact that nonlinear responses
require the introduction of at least two quasiparticle lifetimes,
the interband lifetime τinter and the intraband lifetime τintra,
that play a significant role in regulating both the optically
resonant as well as the transport response [ 49, 95–101]. It
is therefore no surprise that these lifetimes compete in the
4
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Table 1 . Detailed classifications of nonlinear DC response by perturbation (I) frequency, (II) lifetime, (III) symmetry, together with detailed
correspondences between (IV) different nonlinear phenomena and (V) quantum geometry. (I) Similar to the overview in figure 2, the
possible responses are sorted into three columns according to the excitation frequency . (II) When a finite quasiparticle lifetime is
introduced, injection and shift current can be separated by their lifetime dependence, as can be NLD, BCD and QMD in the transport
regime. In the subgap regime between optics and transport, both interband lifetime τinter and intraband lifetime τintra matter. (III) The
intrinsic symmetry of the response is denoted by round brackets (· , ·) for symmetric indices, while square brackets [· , ·] denote
antisymmetric spatial components. Time reversal ( T ) and the combined parity-time reversal symmetry ( PT ) denote which responses are
singled out if present. (IV) Different probing methods also help the classification, such as the linear/circular polarization of the perturbation
in optics and the longitudinal/Hall response in transport. (V) Recent progress has revealed that each phenomenon can be associated with a
geometric property of the underlying Hilbert space.
Nonlinear DC Response
(I) Frequency  ̄hω > Eg  ̄hω < Eg ωτ ≪ 1
Nonlinear Optics Subgap Nonlinear Transport
(II) Lifetime O(τ 1) O(τ 0) τinter
τintra
̸= 2 τinter
τintra
= 2 O(τ 2) O(τ 1) O(τ 0)
Injection current Shift current Weak
Correlation/
Localization
Strong
Correlation/
Localization
Nonlinear
Drude
Berry
curvature
dipole
Quantum
metric dipole
(III)
Symmetry
σ(a,b);c σ[a,b];c σ(a,b);c σ[a,b];c σ(a,b;c) σ(a,b);c σ(a,b);c
PT T T PT T -breaking PT T PT
(IV)
Phenomenon
Linear
injection
[14, 15]
Circular
injection
[16–23]
Linear
shift
[24–43]
Circular
shift
[15, 44, 45]
Subgap response [46–49] Nonreciprocal
magneto-
resistance
(NMR)
[50–53]
Nonlinear
Anomalous
Hall (NLAH)
[50, 54–59]
Intrinsic
NMR &
NLAH
[60–67]
(V) Quantum
Geometry
Quantum
metric
Berry
curvature
Symplectic
Christoffel
symbol
Christoffel
symbol of
1st kind
— Translation Rotation Distortion
subgap regime, where their ratio τinter
τintra
can indicate the differ-
ence between strong and weak correlation effects, as indicated
in the ‘Subgap’ column of table 1.
The introduction of two lifetimes helps to establish a con-
nection across optical, subgap and transport regime under a
unified Feynman diagrammatic formalism. Historically, the
above three categories have been discussed under very differ-
ent perspectives, even though they belong to the same order
nonlinear processes. For instance, optical responses are usu-
ally derived in the reduced density matrix formalism [14, 100],
while transport responses are typically discussed in a semiclas-
sical approach [ 51]. In these latter approaches, only a single
phenomenological lifetime τ is introduced, which has a vague
physical origin and does not distinguish between interband
and intraband processes. Y et, as shown in figure 4, using a
diagrammatic approach, interband and intraband transitions
are clearly separated and the relaxation times can be connec-
ted to a physical mechanism via the self-energies Σ = i/(2τ )
of the quasiparticle Green’s functions [ 15]. In such a dia-
grammatic formalism, the subgap response likewise arises nat-
urally as an incomplete cancellation between injection and
shift current. This incompletely canceled conductivity can
therefore serve as a probe of the quasiparticle self-energies
in the system, and shed light on the microscopic scattering
mechanisms.
Finally, from the same diagrams the transport regime is
accessible by a combined limit ω → 0 and τinter
τintra
→ 2. Here, the
lifetime ratio being 2 might seem somewhat special. However,
it is merely implementing the requirement that the quasi-
particle cannot decay (and thus escape) while being in the
excited state, which enforces charge conservation in the adia-
batic case. In terms of the underlying electronic processes,
it is not surprising that both intraband and interband trans-
itions are important in all nonlinear response regimes: DC cur-
rent generation (like in the BPVE) always arises from intra-
band transitions as shown in figures 4(a) and (b), while on the
flip side even in the transport limit virtual (i.e. off-resonant)
excitations continue to contribute. This further highlights the
importance of keeping track of the microscopic quasiparticle
properties.
1 .4. Symmetry
Contributions of these quantum geometric quantities can be
further separated or singled out by their symmetry dependen-
cies since different geometric quantities and their correspond-
ing nonlinear effects possess dissimilar symmetries as shown
from the row (III)–(V) of table 1. As we point out in the row
(III) of table 1 and figure 3, two kinds of symmetry properties
dictate the behavior of nonlinear phenomena and their corres-
ponding quantum geometric quantities, firstly the symmetry of
conductivity tensor and secondly the symmetry of the material.
The symmetry of conductivity tensor originates from the
permutation symmetry between spatial indices. In table 1 and
5
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Figure 3. Overview for the separation of the nonlinear response based on symmetry. (a) In the optical regime, linearly ( E↕) and circularly
(Eö) can distinguish responses which are symmetric and antisymmetric with respect to the spatial indices of electric field. (b) In the
transport regime, a measurement of different currents ( j1,2) with different applied fields ( E1,2) allows the investigation of both fully
transverse (σyy;x) and off-axis directions ( σxy;y) conductivities, which helps separate the NLD contribution that is fully permutational
symmetric (σ(a,b;c)). It’s also possible to distinguish different geometric contributions using materials with different symmetry, e.g. (c)
time-reversal (T -) symmetric material WTe 2 and (d) the parity-time inversion ( PT -) symmetric material MnBi 2Te4, the red arrows
represents magnetic moments of Mn, showing an anti-ferromagnetic order.
throughout this review, we use σ(a,b);c and σ[a,b];c to represent
the conductivity tensors that are symmetric and antisymmet-
ric after permutation of electric field spatial indices a and b.
Likewise, the symbol σ(a,b;c) will indicate a fully symmetric
conductivity tensor under any permutation among both elec-
tric field spatial indices a and b as well as the current spatial
index c (cf NLD column of table 1).
The symmetry of the conductivity tensor can be exploited
by the spatial configuration of perturbation to separate differ-
ent quantum geometric responses. In the optical regime, this
is achieved by perturbing the system with linearly or circu-
larly polarized light, which detects the symmetric and anti-
symmetric part of the optical conductivity tensor, respectively
(cf figure3(a)). This allows, for instance, separating a quantum
metric contribution from the Berry curvature in the injection
current, where the former is spatial indices symmetric while
the latter is antisymmetric. In the transport regime, this is
achieved by measuring current at different Hall bar contacts
when applying distinct electric field (cf figure 3(b)), which
allows separating NLD from BCD and QMD terms that are not
symmetric under full spatial indices permutation [ 102]. It is
worth mentioning that the difference of permutation symmetry
is actually a manifestation of the axial-gravitational anom-
aly [ 103], a close relative of the chiral anomaly. This may
provide a promising avenue to explore a quantum anomaly
which is otherwise rather difficult to access. Finally, also at
nonlinear order surface contributions can exist which often
enhance the nonlinear photocurrents [ 104–106].
Apart from the symmetry of conductivity tensor, it is also
possible to utilize the symmetry of materials to single out
certain quantum geometric contribution (cf figures 3(c) and
(d)). For the second order charge response, the most important
symmetries are the magnetic point group symmetry and the
space-time symmetry. This encompasses, in particular, inver-
sion (P) and time-reversal (T ) as well as the combined parity-
time reversal symmetry ( PT ).
Generally, all 2nd-order current responses require break-
ing of P. This is because the current j changes sign while
the electric field, which enters quadratically, does not. In a
P-breaking system, we can further separate different geomet-
ric contributions in T - or PT -symmetric materials. In non-
linear optics, the injection current growing with time and the
shift current with constant amplitude possess distinct T - and
PT - symmetries, and so do the linear and circular polariz-
ations of the electromagnetic field. T - and PT - symmetry
transformation can also be used to distinguish different geo-
metric quantities [ 15, 45]; for instance, the Berry curvature
vanishes in a PT -symmetric system. Similar symmetry con-
straints appear in nonlinear transport, where PT enforces a
vanishing BCD contribution, such that only the NLD and
QMD terms survive. On the other hand, T enforces vanishing
NLD and QMD terms, leaving only the NLAH effect nonzero.
It is this NLAH which famously can lead to an anomalous Hall
signal in a time-reversal symmetric system [58], which helped
ignite much of the recent developments regarding nonlinear
responses.
Additionally, one can consider more intricate space-time
symmetries such as rotational symmetries ( Cn) and their com-
bination with T . Although all 2nd-order conductivity tensors
share the same rotational transformation properties, it is still
possible to exclude a pure Hall contribution based on the pres-
ence of spatial rotational symmetries such as C3z. It is also pos-
sible to separate different responses by their combined space-
time symmetries. For example, the combination CnT usually
results in a separation of the response in different directions.
Namely, C2zT acts as T in the z-direction while also acting
like PT in the x–y plane, therefore responses that respect
PT survive in the x–y plane while those respecting T sur-
vive in the z-direction. We also point out here that for the
most general system with no specific symmetry, it is possible
to contain contributions from all geometric quantities, then it
is still possible to utilize the permutational symmetry of the
6
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
corresponding conductivity tensor to conduct relevant meas-
urement to distinguish different contributions, as shown in
figures 3(a) and (b).
1 .5. Experiments
The nonlinear Hall effect has been studied experimentally in
transition metal dichalcogenides like WTe 2 and MoTe 2 [58,
59, 107, 108], and in the semimetals BaMnSb 2 [109] and
TaIrTe4 [110]. These and other Weyl semimetals like TaAs,
CoSi and RhSi can likewise exhibit a large nonlinear optical
response [ 21–25, 82]. Another promising platform is even-
numbered layers of CrI 3, which constitute a PT-symmetric
band structure [ 44, 81]. Enhanced nonlinear responses have
also been reported vdWs heterostructures stacked at a finite
twist angle like twisted multilayer graphene [ 111, 112], twis-
ted WSe 2 [113] as well as twisted WTe 2 [114]. Bi 2Se3 is a
well-studied topological insulator for which SHG has been
mapped out [ 115]. Finally, experiments in the weakly doped
semiconductor MnBi 2Te4 have seen signatures of the trans-
verse and longitudinal contributions of the QMD [66, 67], and
a BPVE has also been reported [ 26].
1 .6. Extrinsic scattering
Despite the fact that the emerging physical picture regarding
nonlinear responses is rather well-understood, we emphasize
that this phenomenology does not capture the entire range of
nonlinear current generation. The mechanisms covered by the
diagrammatic approach mentioned above are usually referred
to as intrinsic nonlinear response formalism, which includes
the effect of disorder, phonons and other relaxation mech-
anisms only indirectly in the form of the self-energy of the
one-particle Green’s functions. However, the underlying phys-
ical processes can lead to additional contributions to the cur-
rent, which are usually termedextrinsic mechanisms. Extrinsic
AC-effects are related to the current carrying steady-state that
develops in the presence of additional relaxation channels, for
example via skew scattering [ 116] or phonon creation [ 87,
94, 117]. In the dc-limit, the major sources of extrinsic cur-
rent generation are resonant impurity scattering and related
momentum-relaxing processes, which enter as a renormaliz-
ation of velocity vertices or even higher-order contributions in
the diagrammatic expansion. Such effects beyond lifetime cor-
rections are known to contribute prominently to the anomalous
Hall effect at linear order [118]. Similar extrinsic mechanisms
are to be expected and have been discussed in the nonlinear
regime [ 56, 119–124]. Most importantly, in some cases they
might be comparable or even larger than the intrinsic contribu-
tions [72]. Although extrinsic and intrinsic mechanisms gen-
erally coexist in most systems, it is often possible to separate,
suppress, or even exclude extrinsic contributions through cer-
tain symmetries [64] or measurement methods [ 66, 67].
1 .7 . Structure of the review
The relationship between quantum geometry and nonlinear
responses extends beyond formal associations, revealing a rich
collection of physical phenomena where quantum geometric
quantities, especially those other than Berry curvature, directly
play a role. The recent establishment of this perspective thus
makes nonlinear responses promising probes of quantum geo-
metric properties. Additionally, the insights from the quantum
geometry can be leveraged to better control for example pho-
tosensing in nonlinear optics or rectification in nonlinear trans-
port devices.
This review is structured as follows. In section 2, we
briefly review the perturbation theory underlying nonlinear
responses, elucidating three major regimes: nonlinear optics,
subgap response and nonlinear transport and the corres-
ponding physical process using Feynman diagrammatics. In
section 3, we discuss the BPVE in nonlinear optics, illuminat-
ing the direct correspondence between quantum geometry and
nonlinear responses. In particular, we show how the physical
observables including the injection and shift current follow
from the quantum geometry. The symmetry property shared
by quantum geometry and the corresponding phenomena is
also discussed. In section 4, we give an exposition of the sub-
gap regime, a much less studied parameter range, focusing
on lifetime effects and the 2-lifetime prescription. We clarify
how the subgap response arises from the incomplete cancella-
tion between injection and shift current in off-resonant optics,
which highlights the subtle but important interplay of intra-
and interband processes in all nonlinear charge responses.
Section 5 is dedicated to the nonlinear transport regime, illus-
trating the geometric interpretation of NLD, BCD, and QMD
as translation, self-rotation, and distortion of semiclassical
wavepackets. We further discuss the strong constraints on life-
times and symmetry properties, in particular how the transport
limit arises when τinter = 2τintra, a consequence of charge con-
servation. The resulting intrinsic nonlinear response formal-
ism not only unifies different regimes in nonlinear responses,
but also predicts new effects such as a nonlinear Hall effect in
magnetic insulators. Finally, in section 6, we provide a sum-
mary of the key points discussed and offer an outlook on future
research directions in the field of nonlinear responses and
quantum geometry. A number of abbreviations are used for
frequently recurring terms, which are summarized in table 2
for convenience.
2. Basic concepts
2.1 . Quantum geometric quantities
For a set of Bloch-periodic eigenfunctions |un(k)⟩ with band
index n, it is possible to study the geometric properties of the
complex projective space spanned by the momentum k in the
BZ. To this end, one can define the QGT [11, 125, 126],
Qab
n (k) = ⟨∂kaun (k) | [1 − |un (k)⟩⟨un (k) |] |∂kbun (k)⟩
= gab
n (k) − i
2 Ωab
n (k) , (1)
whose imaginary part is the Berry curvature, whereas the
real part is called quantum metric . In the complex manifold
spanned by a given band n, gab
n measures distances, while Ωab
n
quantifies local sources of the Berry phase. It’s also common to
7
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Table 2. List of abbreviations used in the text.
Abbr. Meaning
SHG Second harmonic generation
BPVE Bulk photovoltaic effect
BPGE Bulk photogalvanic effect
AC(ac) Alternating current
DC(dc) Direct current
NLD Nonlinear Drude
BCD Berry curvature dipole
QMD Quantum metric dipole
QAH Quantum anomalous Hall
NLAH Nonlinear anomalous Hall
NMR Nonreciprocal magneto-resistance
NQAHE Nonlinear quantum anomalous Hall effect
T Time-reversal
P Parity (spatial inversion)
PT Parity-time inversion
Cnz n-fold rotational symmetry with respect to z-axis
Mz Mirror symmetry with respect to z-axis
TMDs Transition metal dichalcogenides
vdWs van-der-Waals
QGT Quantum geometric tensor
QC Quantum connection
BZ Brillouin zone
encounter vector form of Berry curvature Ωn which is related
to the antisymmetric tensor form of Ωab
n by (Ωn)a ≡ 1
2 εabcΩbc
n
where εabc is the Levi-Civita symbol.
One can also define the Qab
M (k) for manifolds M con-
taining multiple bands, which is in general not the sum of
equation ( 1) [ 127]. Of particular interest is the QGT of the
ground state, a fundamental property of an bulk solid. For the
ground state, the QGT has an intuitive interpretation as the
second moment of the position operator, ⟨( ˆXa − ⟨ˆXa⟩)( ˆXb −
⟨ ˆXb⟩)⟩. Denoting the projection to the target manifold by ˆP and
momentum derivatives as ∂ka
ˆP = ∂a ˆP, the QGT tensor can be
written very compactly as
Qab = tr
h
ˆP

∂a ˆP

∂b ˆP
i
. (2)
Based on this form, it is possible to generalize the notion of
quasi-local geometric objects, with the canonical next order
term being the QC [ 12]
Qa;bc = tr
h
ˆP

∂a ˆP

∂b∂c ˆP
i
. (3)
The imaginary part of the QC is related to the third cumu-
lant ⟨ ˆX3⟩. In optical responses, it further becomes necessary
to define multistate (i.e. multiband) variants of the QGT and
QC, which read respectively [ 85, 128],
Qab
mn = tr
h
ˆPn

∂a ˆPm

∂b ˆPn
i
, (4)
Qa;bc
mn = tr
""
ˆPn

∂a ˆPm
"
∂b∂c ˆPn

+

∂b ˆPm

∂c ˆPn
##
.
(5)
Similar to QGT, QC can also be separated into an sym-
metric Qa;(b,c)
mn part and anti-symmetric part Qa;[b,c]
mn , which are
termed ‘Symplectic Christoffel symbol’ and ‘Christoffel sym-
bol of 1st kind’ respectively, as shown in table 1.
A big driving force of the recent developments regarding
nonlinear responses is the fact that sometimes the matrix ele-
ments of response functions simplify to the QGT or the QC.
Explaining the physical origin behind this observation is the
main purpose of the remainder of this review.
2.2. General nonlinear response theory
The basic concepts in nonlinear response theory have been
reviewed before, see for example [ 68]. This section mostly
introduces the associated notation, focusing on the nonlin-
ear response induced by a monochromatic perturbation and
identifying three primary regimes: nonlinear optics, subgap
responses, and nonlinear transports.
If system and perturbation both exhibit time translation
symmetry, the respective response functions also adhere to
it. Taking the electrical conductivity σ as an example, the
response function is given by
σ (t; t1, . . . ,tn) = σ (t + ∆t; t1 + ∆t, . . . ,tn + ∆t) (6)
where {ti}n
i =1 are the times at which perturbations occur,
which contribute to the induced response at time t, while ∆t
represents an arbitrary time translation.
Therefore, after a Fourier transform to the frequency
domain, the response function is proportional to a delta
function, i.e.
σ ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2, . . . , ωn) ∝ δ
0
@ ̄ω −
nX
j =1
ωj
1
A (7)
where {ωi}n
i =1 are the frequencies contained in the perturba-
tion that contribute to the response frequency  ̄ω. This is known
as the frequency sum rule of nth order nonlinear responses. We
point out that the limit  ̄ω → 0 is subtle when the quasiparticle
lifetime τ is finite [ 15, 129], resulting non-commuting limits
between  ̄ω → 0, τ → ∞ and ∆t → ∞.
2.3. Perturbation theory and Feynman diagrams
The microscopic photon absorption and emission processes
occurring during a nonlinear perturbation can be effectively
represented using Feynman diagrams [ 15, 37].
When electromagnetic field is introduced to a crystal-
line system with unperturbed Bloch Hamiltonian ˆH0(k), the
perturbed Bloch Hamiltonian by minimal coupling becomes
ˆH0(k + e
 ̄h A), where A is the vector potential of the electro-
magnetic field. For a spatially homogeneous electric field, we
can adopt a time-dependent yet spatially homogeneous vec-
tor potential A(t) such that E = −∂A/∂t. This perturbation
method is known as the ‘velocity gauge’ because it introduces
the electric field through the vector potential.
It is worth noting that another approach, known as the
‘length gauge’ [14], introduces the external electric field via a
8
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Figure 4. (a) Typical 2nd order DC current generation process in band systems (a.i) with corresponding Feynman diagram (a.ii). An
electron in the valence ( v) band absorbs a photon with frequency ω from vertex va together with an interband transition to conduction ( c)
band, then it absorbs a photon with frequency −ω from vertex vb together with an interband transition to v band, then it generates DC
current with frequency  ̄ω = 0 from vertex vc with an intraband transition this time. (b) all Feynman diagrams contributes to nonlinear
conductivity σab;c( ̄ω; ω1, ω2).
spatially inhomogeneous perturbation ˆH ′ = −eE · ˆr. Although
the ‘length gauge’ and ‘velocity gauge’ are equivalent up to a
gauge transformation of the single-particle basis [ 100, 101],
the ‘length gauge’ breaks the lattice translation symmetry of
the system. This symmetry breaking necessitates the use of a
covariant derivative in momentum space to represent the effect
of the coordinate operator ˆr.
In the velocity gauge the perturbed Bloch Hamiltonian
yields,
ˆH0

k + e
 ̄h A

= ˆH0 (k) + e
 ̄h ˆvaAa +
 e
 ̄h
2 ˆwab
2! AaAb + . . . (8)
Here, ˆva ≡ ∂ ˆH0
∂ka
, ˆwab ≡ ∂2 ˆH0
∂ka∂kb
, etc serve as coefficients in
perturbative expansions, where the Roman subscripts ( a, b, c)
represent the spatial indices ( x, y, z) and the Einstein summa-
tion convention is assumed. These coefficients can also be
regarded as electron–photon scattering vertices in Feynman
diagrams, representing the physical processes occurring dur-
ing a nonlinear response. These vertices are intrinsic prop-
erties of a crystalline system and encapsulate quantum geo-
metric information, which will be reflected in the nonlinear
responses.
To understand how these vertices take part in the electro-
magnetic transitions, we consider the time evolution of an
unperturbed quasiparticle eigenstate |ψn(k)⟩, where n is the
band index. The time evolution satisfies the time-dependent
Schrödinger equation:
i  ̄h∂t|ψn⟩ =

ˆH0 + e
 ̄h ˆvaAa +
 e
 ̄h
2 ˆwab
2! AaAb + . . .

|ψn⟩. (9)
The first term, ˆH0|ψn⟩ =  ̄hεn|ψn⟩, results in a dynamical phase
e−iεnt of the normal propagating quasiparticle eigenstate and
will not contribute a transition to other eigenstates.
On the other hand, terms involvingA can be interpreted as a
one-photon absorption (emission) processes, accompanied by
the transition of an occupied quasiparticle state into an unoc-
cupied state. Such a process is easy to identify in Feynman dia-
grams. For instance, a one-photon absorption process (photon
with frequency ω), which induces a transition from valence
band to conduction band in figure 4(a.i) can be represented by
a scattering across a one-photon vertex in Feynman diagram
as shown by the ˆvb vertex in figure 4(a.ii), where the subscript
indicates the contribution from the b-direction component of
the electric field E (which shares the same direction with the
vector potential A).
Similarly, we can interpret the higher-order couplings as
multi-photon absorption/emission processes accompanied by
a quasiparticle transition. For example, the multi-photon pro-
cesses ˆuabc and ˆwab are depicted in figures 4(b.i) and (b.iv).
It is worth noting that multi-photon absorption/emission hap-
pens simultaneously, in contrast to the sequential one-photon
processes depicted for example in figure 4(b.v).
Combining these processes, we can describe the behavior
of a Bloch state in a perturbed system as follows: the elec-
tromagnetic perturbation can induce one-photon and multi-
photon absorptions/emissions, causing electronic transitions
9
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Table 3. Feynman rules and definition of symbols.
among Bloch bands. After each such a transition, the per-
turbed state continues to propagate in a new band until another
transition occurs. Finally, the current vertex is by definition
1
V
δH
δA where V is the volume of the full system. Thus the cur-
rent vertex enters the diagrammatic expansion in exactly the
same fashion as electron–photon vertices. All processes at
second order in the electric field are shown in figures 4(b.i)–
(b.vi), along with the corresponding Feynman rules and defin-
ition of symbols summarized in table 3. Combined, they
provide a comprehensive description of the intrinsic nonlinear
response.
2.4. Feynman rules
Feynman diagrams not only helps differentiate different
physical processes contributing to each order of nonlinear
responses, but also provide a simple way to formulate the non-
linear conductivity. In principle, the concepts elucidated below
can be employed for the nonlinear response at any order [ 97,
98, 130–134]. However, for the sake of clarity, we restrict the
discussion to the 2nd-order conductivity. We define the 2nd-
order current generation to be described by,
jc ( ̄ω) = σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) Ea (ω1) Eb (ω2) (10)
where j( ̄ω) is the magnitude of 2nd-order current response
with frequency  ̄ω, E(ωi) is the magnitude of electric field with
frequency ωi. Since the frequency summation law is always
satisfied, we can neglect the delta function part for notational
simplicity, more details about this notation is discussed in
appendix A.
To formulate the contribution of different physical pro-
cesses depicted in figures 4(b.i)–(b.vi), one collects all ver-
tices ( ˆv, ˆw, ˆu) and fermionic Matsubara Green’s functions
G(iω) = 1
i ̄hω−H0
along the fermionic loop in the correspond-
ing Feynman diagram and calculates its trace over degree of
freedom of band indices. The internal momentum is integ-
rated over the BZ and the internal frequency is unrestricted.
At each vertex we enforce frequency and momentum conser-
vation. The Matsubara summation is done by residues, which
is followed by an analytical continuation to the real axis.
The full expression of the 2nd-order conductivity is just the
sum of all 2nd-order Feynman diagrams figures 4(b.i)–(b.vi)
in a symmetrized form under internal permutation symmetry
(ω1, a ↔ ω2, b) as shown in equation ( 11), whose derivation
can be found in appendix C.
σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
ˆ
k
∑
m
fm
( ˆuabc
2 + 1
2
[
ˆwab, ˆvc
 ̃ ̄ω − ˆε
]
+
[ ˆva
 ̃ω1 + ˆε , ˆwbc
]
+
[ ˆva
 ̃ω1 + ˆε ,
[
ˆvb, ˆvc
 ̃ ̄ω − ˆε
]])
mm
+ (ω1, a ↔ ω2, b) . (11)
Here, fm ≡ 1
eβ ̄h(εm−μ)+1 represents the Fermi–Dirac distri-
bution of mth band where μ is the chemical potential, β−1 =
kBT for temperature T, and
 ́
k ≡
 ́ dDk
(2π)D , where D is the spa-
tial dimension of the system. Most of the discussion will
be restricted to temperature T = 0. The fractions of operat-
ors in equation ( 11) are defined element-wise. For example,
( ˆva
ωi +ˆε )nm ≡ ˆva
nm
ωi +(ˆε)nm
, where (ˆε)nm = εn − εm. The tilde over
the frequency is defined via analytical continuation  ̃ω = ω +
i 0+, which becomes important for finite quasiparticle particle
lifetimes and will be addressed more in details in section 4.
2.5. Three regimes in 2nd-order responses
In practical scenarios, the most common and simplest perturb-
ation is a monochromatic perturbation which has the form of
cos ωt ∼ eiωt + e−iωt, which contains both ω and −ω compon-
ents. This type of perturbation serves as a fundamental basis
for understanding more complex nonlinear processes.
For a linear order response ( n = 1), the absolute value of
response frequency would always be | ̄ω| = |ω|, meaning the
linear response shares the same frequency as the perturbation.
For a second order response, we can have both| ̄ω| = |ω + ω| =
2|ω| or | ̄ω| = |ω + (−ω)| = 0. The response with | ̄ω| = |2ω|
frequency corresponds to the SHG while the response with
| ̄ω| = 0 corresponds to the BPVE.
When the perturbation frequency ω is comparable with
the band gap Eg, the corresponding nonlinear response is
termed ‘nonlinear optics’, where resonant excitation can hap-
pen between valence and conduction bands. By frequency
10
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
sum rule, the perturbation frequency is  ̄hω > Eg/2 for SHG or
 ̄hω > Eg for BPVE as shown in figures 2(a) and (b) to achieve
this regime.
When the frequency ω does not satisfy the previous condi-
tions, yet it is still comparable to the band gap, off-resonant
optical excitation can still occur. Specifically, for BPVE with
 ̄hω < Eg, the DC current will not necessarily vanish since off-
resonant excitation also contributes to the nonlinear response.
We define this regime where only off-resonant processes con-
tributes to the DC generation in an insulator as the so-called
‘subgap response’.
When the perturbation frequency is further reduced to the
full DC limit, where also ω approaches zero, the quasiparticle
lifetime is much shorter than the perturbation period, i.e. ω ≪
τ −1. This defines the so-called ‘nonlinear transport’ regime
where a semiclassical (Fermi-surface dominated) phenomeno-
logy is expected. Since ω → 0, the formerly distinct processes
SHG and BPVE merge into the same DC response.
3. BPVE
The creation of a photocurrent via rectification has a long his-
tory, but it was not until the works of Kraut and von Baltz [ 78,
79] that it was realized that the bulk band structure of an
inversion-symmetry breaking material can give rise to such.
Phenomenologically, the BPVE can be separated into two
parts according to their time dependence, namely the injec-
tion current whose magnitude grows linearly with time and
the shift current whose magnitude is fixed.
In a real material, no current can grow indefinitely. Instead,
injection and shift current are differentiated by their depend-
ence on quasiparticle lifetime because the injection current
grows until the quasiparticle decoheres. Thus the quasiparticle
lifetime cuts off the injection of current into the system and
making the steady state current proportional to the quasi-
particle lifetime τ . On the other hand, the shift current is not
created by this kind of mechanism and thus does not depend
on τ altogether.
In the following, we present and compare between the semi-
classical and quantum perturbative approaches, which have
been developed in order to rationalize the quantitative prop-
erties of shift and injection currents (cf figure 5).
3.1 . Injection and shift current
The BPVE is a resonant phenomenon. As such, it can be
interpreted as a sequence of excited intermediate states [ 84]
(figures 5(a) and (b)). For injection current, let us focus on the
change in velocity which the transition between valence and
conduction bands causes. The transition rate of electrons from
nth band to mth band is determined by Fermi’s golden rule,
Im←n = 2π
 ̄h2 |⟨m| − eˆr · E|n⟩|2 δ (ω − εmn) (12)
where εmn ≡ (εm − εn) and the momentum dependencies have
been suppressed. Further considering the velocity change
during the transition ∆c
nm ≡ vc
nn − vc
mm =  ̄h∂kcεnm, the rate of
increase in current can then be expressed as,
∂tjc
inj =
ˆ
k
X
n∈occ
m∈unocc
(−e∆c
mn) Im←nfnm (13)
where fnm ≡ fn − fm represents the difference in equilibrium
Fermi–Dirac distribution function. Since there is a squared
electric field in the transition rate, we can rewrite it as
|⟨m|ˆr · E|n⟩|2 = ra
mnrb
nmEaEb and read the injection conductiv-
ity from it,
σab;c
inj = −τ 2π e3
 ̄h2
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnm∆c
mnra
nmrb
mnδ (ω − εmn) . (14)
Because of the ∂t in equation (13), we first get a frequency
denominator (−i ̄ω) in the injection conductivity, which nom-
inally diverges for the BPVE (  ̄ω → 0). However, in a real sys-
tem it is regularized by a finite quasiparticle lifetime which
shifts  ̄ω →  ̄ω + i/τ and makes the injection current propor-
tional to τ .
Similarly, the shift current can be understood as the pos-
itional shift during the transition. To this end, we first recall
that the position of a wavepacket center composed ofnth Bloch
band can be represented by the momentum space integral over
the Berry connection ⟨ˆr⟩n ≡ ⟨un|i ∇k|un⟩ up to a lattice con-
stant according to the modern theory of polarization [ 135],
where |un⟩ is the periodic part of the Bloch wavefunction.
Therefore, the positional shift during an interband transition
should contain the difference ⟨ˆr⟩m − ⟨ˆr⟩n, which is, however,
not invariant under the gauge transformation |un⟩ → eiθn|un⟩.
To remove this ambiguity, the positional shift has to be cor-
rected for the interband phase difference, yielding,
Rc
mn,a = rc
mm − rc
nn + i ∂kc log ra
mn, (15)
which is a gauge invariant observable describing the positional
shift during the interband transition caused by the transition
dipole ra
nm.
The longitudinal shift current can then be expressed as the
positional shift multiplied by the transition rate Im←n and an
occupancy factor f nm, i.e.
jc
shift =
ˆ
k
X
n∈occ
m∈unocc

−eRc
mn,c

Im←nfnm (16)
which leads to the corresponding shift conductivity for arbit-
rary spatial directions in the resonant optical regime, i.e.
σab;c
shift = − 2π e3
 ̄h2
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnmra
nmrb
mnRc
mn,aδ (ω − εmn)
+ (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) . (17)
Since there is one time derivative difference between posi-
tion and velocity, the factor (−iω) in the denominator of σinj is
absent in the expression of σshift, which explains the different
lifetime scaling of both resonances.
1 1
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Figure 5. Overview regarding the photocurrent creation in inversion-symmetry broken bulk materials. The linear response formulation at
second order in the electric field can either be approached as a collection of interband corrections to the semiclassical expectations values (a)
and (b), in terms of the contained quantum geometry (c) and (d), or using diagrammatics (e) and (f). Here, the Feynman diagrams illustrate
the fact that the time-reversed Green’s functions (propagators) of the clockwise and anticlockwise triangle diagrams will not be identical
even if all other parameters a kept fixed. Importantly, there is more than one way in which the time-reversal properties can be broken, as we
elucidate in detail in the text.
The argument presented above employs the length gauge
where the perturbation has the form H ′ = −eˆr · E. It is equi-
valent to the velocity-gauged perturbation H0(k) → H0(k +
e
 ̄h A) up to a time-dependent unitary transformation [ 100],
where the latter one can be formulated easily using Feynman
diagrams. However, we point out that the expression of
the shift current based on this ‘transition rate’ ×‘positional
shift’ only gives the dominant part when resonant trans-
itions happen. For broad resonances, the complete expres-
sions based on the Kubo formula for shift conductivity is
needed [14, 15],
σab;c
shift = e3
 ̄h2
ˆ
k
X
nm
fnmra
nmrb
mnRc
mn,a
ω − εmn + i0+ + (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) . (18)
Using the formula 1
x±i0+ = P 1
x ∓ iπδ(x), it is easy to find
that the physically motivated formulae equations (14) and (17)
are the resonant (delta-function) part of the full response.
On the other hand, the principal parts become important far
from resonance, where they may provide useful informa-
tion about the localization and interaction of system’s ground
state [46, 49].
3.2. Geometric interpretation
As we have seen in the previous section, both injection and
shift conductivity contain matrix elements of the positional
operator rc
mn and shift vector Rc
mn,a, which offer the attractive
opportunity to draw conclusions about the encoded quantum
geometry.
Y et such a geometric interpretation of nonlinear optical
response is subtle compared to more direct geometric nature
of the linear order anomalous Hall effect, where the anom-
alous velocity and Hall current is directly the integral of a
single geometric quantity, the Berry curvature. In contrast, the
injection and shift conductivities are related to several geomet-
ric properties, and multiplied by occupation and dispersion-
related quantities. Also, unlike Hall current where the geo-
metric response is completely determined by the ground state
property, the optical response necessarily involves information
of both ground state and excited states, making the discussion
of geometry quite intricate.
Not surprisingly, the geometric nature of nonlinear optical
responses has only recently been appreciated, starting with
the observation that the injection current induced by circu-
lar polarized light is related to the Berry curvature [ 19]. More
recently, injection and shift current have been associated with
the QGT and QC, respectively [ 84].
The geometric nature of injection and shift current can be
elucidated through a mathematical formula equivalence (cf
figure 5). It can also be related with the geometric properties
of general projected Hilbert space, which becomes a simple
Bloch sphere in systems with only two bands (figures 5(c) and
(d)). Alternatively, both resonant responses can be interpreted
12
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
as an interference effect of coherently counterpropagating qua-
siparticles (figures 5(e) and (f)).
3.2.1 . Formula equivalence. Since the optical response
indispensably involves information from both occupied and
unoccupied states, let us focus on a pair of occupied and unoc-
cupied bands with a momentum subspace where the transition
between unoccupied mth band and occupied nth band matches
the frequency of incident light, i.e. ω = εmn(k). One can then
define a manifold Sk of optically allowed transitions as Sk ≡
{k ∈ BZ|ω = εmn(k)}. Similar to the linear order anomalous
Hall conductivity, which is proportional to the integral of
Berry curvature over all occupied states, the injection and shift
current are then proportional to the integral of their corres-
ponding quantum geometric quantities over Sk.
Specifically, the injection current is proportional to the
momentum space integral of QGT Qab =P
n∈occ
m∈unocc
ra
nmrb
mn
over Sk, i.e.
σab;c
inj = −τ 2π e3
 ̄h2 ˆc ·
ˆ
ωmn=ω
d⃗SkQab (19)
where the Qab is composed of the quantum metric gab
(real/symmetric part) and Berry curvature Ωab (imagin-
ary/antisymmetric part), and can be roughly expressed as the
expectation value of two momentum derivative over Bloch
states, i.e. ⟨∂k∂k⟩.
Similarly, [42, 84, 85] found that the shift current is pro-
portional to the momentum space integral of the QC over Sk,
i.e.
σab;c
shift = − 2π e3
 ̄h2
ˆ
k
X
n∈occ
m∈unocc
Im

Qc;ab
mn

δ (ω − εmn) . (20)
This connection describes how the tangential vector changes
as it moves along a curved manifold, which in this case
is the projected Hilbert space. However, a much more in-
depth analysis reveals that the (interband) QC actually con-
tains two distinct geometric pieces, one related to the third
moment of position, while the second piece constitutes torsion
tensor, a true multi-state quantity which has no ground-state
equivalent [42, 128].
3.2.2. Bloch sphere picture. For illustration let us repeat
the previous analysis for a 2-band system. Then, the projec-
ted Hilbert space is just a Bloch sphere whose geometry is
easy to draw (figures 5(c) and (d)). Moreover, there is only
one pair of occupied and unoccupied bands that contributes to
the optical response while in general systems all combinations
of occupied and unoccupied bands may contribute as long as
ωmn = ω. Most importantly, the unoccupied states are com-
pletely determined by the occupied states since the remain-
ing state vector is orthogonal. The Hamiltonian of a general
2-band system can be described as,
ˆH0 (k) = d (k) · ⃗ σ+ d0 (k) σ0 (21)
where σi, i ∈ {1, 2, 3} are Pauli matrices of a generic
pseudo-spin degree of freedom, and σ0 is the 2 by 2 identity
matrix. The wavefunction information is completely stored in
the vector d(k) or equivalently ˆd(k) ≡ d(k)
|d(k)| , where the eigen-
states can be defined as polarized states, |u±,k⟩ ≡ | ˆd(k), ±⟩,
satisfying ˆH0|ˆd, ±⟩ = (d0 ± |d|)|ˆd, ±⟩. The manifold com-
posed of ˆd forms a unit sphere in R3 space, i.e. the Bloch
sphere. The wavefunction maps a momentum vector k to a
point on the Bloch sphere ˆd(k), or equivalently its corres-
ponding state vector |un,k⟩, assuming the band index n is
determined. Such a map is analogous to the map from spher-
ical coordinate x ≡ (x1, x2) = (θ, φ) to the sphere S2. In this
spherical coordinate map, the metric gμν is defined by the
squared distance d s2 = gabdxadxb between two close points
xa and xa + dxa, the curvature Ωab is defined by the oriented
area of small parallelogram d A = Ωabdxa
1 ∧ dxb
2 formed by dxa
1
and d xb
2 near point x, and the connection Qa;bc is defined by
the shift in the orientation of a basis tangent vectors when
parallel-transported along certain directions.
Therefore, in order to discuss the distance between two
state vectors mapped from k and k + dk in the projected
Hilbert space, or the area of small parallelogram formed by
state vector mapped from k and k + dk1 to k and k + dk2,
or a of the local coordinate frame upon translation from k to
k + dk, this information is contained in the metric, curvature,
and connection induced by the map between the BZ and the
projected Hilbert space.
Returning to the nonlinear optical resonances, the quantum
metric and Berry curvature depict the infinitesimal length and
area which a state travels in the projected Hilbert space, which
is measured by the injection current. For shift current, the QC
can be regarded as the change in tangent vector when a given
state moves adiabatically along the Bloch sphere. Of course,
the same quantity also represents the shift of the center point
of a Bloch wave packet in the unit cell. Since the geometric
understanding of the connection is the shift of the tangent vec-
tor during parallel transport, the physical understanding of the
connection in the projected Hilbert space should be as a shift of
the wavepacket position along certain k-path, thereby recov-
ering the previously outlined interpretation.
Nonetheless, we caution against taking the Bloch sphere
trajectory too literally. First, the Bloch sphere here should
be considered as an ‘interband’ manifold made up of inter-
band transition since nonlinear optics inevitably involves one
unoccupied and one occupied band. Only for two bands such
an ‘interband’ Bloch sphere actually isomorphic to the usual
Bloch sphere. Secondly, even when an N-band system is con-
sidered, the N single-band geometric quantities should be gen-
eralized to N(N − 1) interband geometric quantities where
quantum metric, Berry curvature and QC are all redefined for
pairs of bands made up of mth and nth index, which means
that a suitable generalized Bloch sphere grows rapidly in
dimension [42, 84, 128].
13
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
3.3. Destructive interference
In weakly disordered system, the weak localization mechan-
ism features a constructive interference between two time-
reversed paths, which maximizes the probability amplitude at
the origin where the wavepacket starts to move. Therefore,
a wavepacket has an enhanced probability to stay at its ori-
ginal position, indicating the tendency towards localization.
However, breaking time-reversal symmetry, for example by
magnetic impurities, destroys the constructive interference at
the origin, thus increasing the mobility of charge carriers in an
effect termed weak anti-localization.
A similar argument can be applied to explain the physical
origins of the injection and shift current: If the response breaks
time-reversal symmetry, two time-reversed diagrams cannot
interfere constructively, thus the electron can become deloc-
alized and contribute a nonzero conductivity. The destructive
interference results from in-equivalent time-reversed closed
trajectories, which can be caused by two mechanisms. One
comes from the inequivalence in distance and area, the other
comes from the inequivalence caused by local direction (cf
figures 5(e) and (f)).
Taking injection current as an example, the appearance of
injection current can be regarded as the inequivalence of time-
reversal counterpart Feynman diagram because of nontrivial
quantum metric and Berry curvature. From diagrammatic lan-
guage, the 2 closed trajectories in the triangular diagrams are
related by time-reversal (denoted by ö and œ, respectively)
and contribute,
σab;c
△;ö + σab;c
△;œ = e3
 ̄h2ω2
X
n,m,l
ˆ
k
fnm
ω + εnm + i0+
×
 va
nmvb
mlvc
ln
 ̄ω + εnl + i0+ − va
nmvc
mlvb
ln
 ̄ω + εlm + i0+

+ (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) . (22)
Using that  ̄ω = 0, the summation of time-reversal counter-
part diagrams gives,
1
ω + εnm − i0+ − 1
ω + εnm + i0+ = 2π iδ (ω + εnm) (23)
which corresponds to the energy conserving delta function in
the ‘transition rate’ ×‘velocity/position shift’ -based physical
interpretation. Because of the delta function, one can substitute
ω with εa
mn which changes va
nm into ra
mn by va
mn = i εnmra
nm. This
yields the same expression as equation ( 14) as we derived in
section 3.1.
The two transition dipoles indicate a proportionality to
QGT. Such an incomplete cancellation is caused by the non-
trivial distance and area property on the projected Hilbert
space. Similarly, the shift current can also be regarded as
caused by destructive interference between two time-reversal
counterparts via the nontrivial nonparallelism of the projected
Hilbert space, which manifests the QC of the system. The lat-
ter mechanism is much weaker because time-reversal is broken
only in terms of the rectified current, i.e. an inverted traject-
ory is not guaranteed to trace out the same positions, while
velocity and distances are equal for both directions. Of course,
we hasten to note that the analogy with weak anti-localization
works in some features, but fails for others. For example, non-
linear responses do not entail any resummation over repeated
perturbations up to infinite order.
Altogether, the physical interpretation by a ‘transition
rate’×‘velocity/positional shift’ argument, the geometric
interpretation via a Bloch sphere picture, as well as the inter-
pretation via quantum interference provide a complete and
versatile understanding of the nonlinear optical response in
both physical and quantum geometric aspects. This shows the
power of quantum geometry in re-imagining convoluted per-
turbation expressions, which can help us develop new avenues
towards measuring quantum geometry or, conversely, sharpen
the predictions regarding nonlinear response functions.
3.4. Symmetry separation
We have shown in nonlinear optical regime that the total cur-
rent response can be separated into the injection and shift cur-
rent, which are further linked with different quantum geomet-
ric quantities. However, the current response always comes as
a whole, which makes the investigation of a specific kind of
quantum geometric quantity difficult. As we explain hence-
forth, such difficulties can be bypassed by exploiting different
symmetry constraints, which include the intrinsic permutation
symmetry of the nonlinear conductivity tensor and the sym-
metry of the material’s microscopic Hamiltonian.
Regarding the permutation symmetry of nonlinear conduct-
ivity tensor, it essentially boils down to inducing bulk photo-
voltaic currents with different spatial configurations of the per-
turbing electromagnetic field, i.e. linearly polarized light vs
circularly polarized light. As detailed in appendix B.2, the
BPVE induced by linearly polarized light is proportional to
the symmetric part of the conductivity tensor σ(a,b);c while
the difference in the current induced by left and right handed
circularly polarized light is proportional to the antisymmetric
part of the conductivity tensor σ[a,b];c. Since the conductivity
tensor and their corresponding quantum geometric quantities
share the same symmetry, we can expect linearly polarized
light to single out the contribution of quantum metricgab in the
injection current as well as the contribution of symplectic QC
Qa;(b,c) in the shift current, while the circular BPVE extracts
those of Berry curvature Ωab and Christoffel symbol of 1st
kind Qa;[b,c], as shown in table 1.
Regarding the symmetry of the bulk material, the most
important two symmetries are spatial inversion ( P, parity)
and time-reversal (T ). As mentioned, P symmetry renders the
second order current jc( ̄ω) = σab;c( ̄ω; ω1, ω2)Ea(ω1)Eb(ω2)
zero since P changes the sign of current jc( ̄ω) yet leaves EaEb
invariant. With respect to T , the shift current jshift and the
injection current ∂tjinj possess opposing symmetry properties,
similar to the behavior of velocity and acceleration under T .
Such distinct T -symmetry properties of different nonlinear
responses result from different symmetry properties of their
corresponding quantum geometric quantities under T trans-
formation. Therefore, Berry-curvature-, quantum-metric-, and
14
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
quantum-connection-related conductivities are also expec-
ted to be separable by T and other magnetic point group
symmetries.
To be more specific, T transformation of injection con-
ductivity (equation (14)) and shift conductivity (equation (17))
require time-reversal transforming all corresponding matrix
elements. As further explained in the appendix B.3, we have
fT ,nm(k) = −fmn(−k), va
T ,nm(k) = −va
mn(−k), ∆c
T ,mn(k) =
∆c
nm(−k), Rc
T ,mn,a(k) = −Rc
nm,a(−k), εT ,nm(k) = εnm(−k).
Substituting these results into the expression of injection
conductivity yields σab;c
T ,inj(ω) = −σab;c
inj (−ω) and σab;c
T ,shift(ω) =
σab;c
shift(−ω). Also as detailed in appendix B.1, a real-valued
physical response further imposes an intrinsic permuta-
tion symmetry on conductivity tensor, i.e. σab;c
inj/shift(−ω) =
σba;c
inj/shift(ω). Furthermore, time reversal symmetry enforces the
constraint σab;c
inj/shift(ω) = σab;c
T ,inj/shift(ω), which implies,
σab;c
inj (ω)
T
= −σba;c
inj (ω) , σ ab;c
shift (ω)
T
= σba;c
shift (ω) . (24)
The real-valued dc current requires the second order BPVE
conductivity to be symmetric in the real part, which there-
fore contributes to the response for linear polarization, while
the imaginary part contributes to the circular polarized light
response, giving rise to circular dichroism, i.e. the difference
in currents induced by left and right handed circularly polar-
ized light (cf appendix B.2). Based on this analysis, it becomes
obvious why in T -symmetric system the injection current can
only be induced by circular polarized light. Along the same
lines, one can show that in T -symmetric systems the shift cur-
rent is induced by linear polarized light.
With respect to the combined symmetry transformation
of space-time inversion ( PT ), which induces another (−1)3
factor because of the P transformation on 3 spatial indices,
the situation is reversed, i.e.
σab;c
inj (ω)
PT
= σba;c
inj (ω) , σ ab;c
shift (ω)
PT
= −σba;c
shift (ω) . (25)
Therefore, in PT -symmetric system the resonant responses
exchange roles, i.e. current injection is induced by linear polar-
ized light while the shift current forms in response to circular
polarized light [44, 45].
More general magnetic point group symmetries lead to
more subtle constraints [ 102]. For example, C2zT symmetry
acts like T symmetry on the z axis while acting like PT
symmetry on the x–y plane. This will cause a separation of
the response in the material based on spatial direction. For
instance, linear polarized light can only induce shift currents
along z-direction while inducing injection current in the x–y
plane. Similar response separation effects based on the effect-
ive symmetry in a certain sub-direction or sub-plane, are sum-
marized in table 4.
As a corollary of these symmetry considerations, we point
out that magnetic systems with low internal symmetry gener-
ically exhibit both injection and shift current.
Table 4. Effective symmetry of (magnetic) point groups along
different spatial directions. I represents identity transformation,
while Pxy and Pz represents spatial inversion only in x–y plane and
z-axis, which renders all 2nd order charge current response in that
sub-direction or sub-plane zero.
C2z C3z C4z C6z Mz C2zT C 3zT C 4zT C 6zT M zT
x–y Pxy C3z Pxy Pxy I PxyT T P xy PxyT T
z I I I I Pz T T T T P zT
3.5. Extrinsic photocurrents
Besides the response created by the bulk band structure, a
number of extrinsic effects of nonlinear photocurrent gen-
eration have been investigated. Historically, these are usu-
ally known as ballistic currents [ 69], which arise in the
driven steady state alongside the shift current, mostly due
to phonon-assisted relaxation [ 87, 136–139], and which have
been observed experimentally [140]. Another important factor
outside the purview of the non-interacting band structure are
excitonic in-gap states [ 141–143]. Scattering can also lead to
additional AC-DC effects [ 144], and even facilitate a reverse
BVPE which converts DC current into an AC signal, known as
the gyrotropic Hall effect [ 145]. Compared to intrinsic contri-
butions, less is known about the underlying quantum geometry
of extrinsic photocurrent generation, but recent progress [ 87]
suggests that generalized shift vectors can be constructed
which account for the changes in the Bloch wave function in
diagonal transitions which can involve different energies or
momenta due to extrinsic scattering and are related to both the
diagonal and off-diagonal components of the Berry curvature.
4. Finite lifetime and subgap response
When the frequency is smaller than the bandgap, in an insu-
lator one might expect the DC response to vanish, as reson-
ant interband transitions are no longer possible [ 146–148].
However, as it turns out in magnetic materials the second order
response is not entirely extinguished [ 46–48, 149]. To appre-
ciate this aspect, let us point out that the derivation of the non-
linear optical resonances as detailed in the previous sections
implicitly assumes a clean limit, where the only lifetime effect
is to broaden the resonance peak (i.e. the response consists
entirely of regularized delta-functions). Not contained in such
an approach are broad features in the response which contrib-
ute an off-resonant background that is unavoidably present in
second order responses. Indeed, in the most general case the
subgap response remains nonzero and offers a valuable avenue
for probing the effects of finite lifetimes, as well as the inter-
action and localization mechanisms underlying the system.
4.1 . Introduction of two lifetimes
As alluded to in the introduction, from the nonlinear Kubo
expressions it is expected that both interband and intraband
lifetimes impact the conductivity [ 46]. Phenomenologically,
on one hand nonlinear optical responses are entirely derived
15
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
from resonant interband transitions. On the other hand, nonlin-
ear transport probes the adiabatic regime where the frequency
is so small that only intraband transitions matter. It is then
logical that an intermediate crossover regime exists where the
frequency is neither resonant to interband nor intraband trans-
itions and both two lifetimes matters.
On a formal level, compared to implementing a simple
lifetime broadening in all Green’s functions G(ω) → G(ω +
i/(2τ )), in a multiband setting it is worthwhile to consider
several, band-specific broadening factors. For example, when
comparing conduction band and valence band electrons, one
can immediately deduce from their respective density of states
that a more dispersive band will exhibit weaker disorder scat-
tering, thus giving rise to dissimilar lifetimes. This holds true
even before taking into account orbitally selective interac-
tion or disorder effects. If the quasiparticle excitations are rel-
atively long-lived, one can assume that each decay process
is statistically independent. In that case, staying within the
two-band picture, the interband and intraband lifetime can be
related to individual lifetimes from conduction and valence
band through Matthiessen’s Rule, i.e.
τ −1
inter = (2τc)−1 + (2τv)−1 (26)
τ −1
intra = (2τv)−1 + (2τv)−1 . (27)
Two physically important cases can be distinguished. In the
optical regime ( ωτ ≫ 1), the quasiparticles in the conduction
and valence band are both on-shell, carrying their respective
microscopic lifetimes τ c and τ v, which can lead to a nonlin-
ear subgap response with a substantial amplitude and distinct
frequency-dependence.
On the other hand, in the transport regime ( ωτ ≪ 1), the
transport problem becomes entirely restricted to the low-
energy regime close to the Fermi level. In the latter case, it
becomes important to enforce charge conservation in the low-
energy sector. Mainly, this means that electrons which are
(virtually) excited to the conduction band should not decay
within the excited band but instead return to the valence
band unperturbed, because otherwise the state is lost for
the low-energy description. This requirement is straightfor-
wardly implemented in the Feynman diagrammatic formalism
by choosing τv/τc → 0, which provides a natural transition
from the optical regime to the transport regime. As outlined
below, this approach can yield all key results of the intrinsic
nonlinear transport such as the NLD response, BCD, and
QMD—findings that align with those derived from a semiclas-
sical Boltzmann formalism. Moreover, the quantum-coherent
treatment extends beyond the capabilities of a semiclassical
approach. On the other hand, a real material might violate the
condition τv/τc → 0, in which case a more elaborate quantum
kinetic ansatz must be pursued.
4.2. Subgap responses
In subgap regime, the separation of the injection and shift
current is no longer guaranteed because the response is
completely off-resonant. Y et it still makes sense to discuss
both off-resonant parts separately and see how they merge
upon lower the drive frequency.
To make progress, the perturbation theory needs to be mod-
ified to include finite lifetimes such that they account for inter-
band and intraband processes. To this end, the poles in the
response functions are adjusted such that ω − εmn is replaced
either by by ω − εmn + i τ −1
inter for the case n ̸= m, which rep-
resents the interband transition. Conversely, in the case n = m
representing intraband transitions, it is replaced by ω − εnn +
i τ −1
intra. For sake of clarity, let us focus on the longitudinal
response, i.e. a = b = c. The leading-order, off-resonant con-
ductivity in a time-reversal breaking compound is then [ 49],
σaa;a
inj + σaa;a
shift ≈ − e3
 ̄h2ω2
 2
α − 1
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnm|ra
nm|2∆a
nm (28)
where a lifetime dependence enters through the parameter
α = τinter/τintra. For large enough frequencies, typically near
the band edge, the subgap signal is still sufficiently strong.
Since the value of α depends on the microscopic lifetimes in
the system, this subgap signal thus offers a window into the
short-time dynamics across the band gap. On the other hand, as
ω decreases, charge conservation enforces that τinter → 2τintra,
hence α → 2 and the off-resonant ac conductivity thus tends
to zero very quickly inside the gap.
5. Nonlinear transport
The charge conductivity at linear order famously carries an
anomalous Hall effect which is due to a modification of the
semiclassical equation of motion by the Berry curvature. The
Berry curvature is a ground state property which encodes
the self-rotation of the corresponding Bloch state. Crucially,
while the Berry curvature is a ground state property, it can
only assume nonzero values if the band structure entails more
than a single band. Therefore, the anomalous motion which
is induced by the Berry curvature is clearly a multi-band
effect, seemingly depending on the entire band structure, des-
pite the fact that the wavepacket propagation itself exclus-
ively involves states close to the Fermi surface. This apparent
contradiction is resolved by noting that quantum-mechanical
operators can acquire renormalized expectation values due to
virtual (interband) fluctuations.
The same guiding principles regarding anomalous compon-
ents of the motion can be applied in the nonlinear regime.
Nevertheless, semiclassically it is tough to capture all pieces
of the anomalous motion at second order in the electric field,
depending on which operators are modified in the semiclas-
sics [50, 51, 62, 64, 90, 150]. Starting from the finite-frequency
expressions and performing a low-frequency expansion is like-
wise a subtle endeavor [37, 49, 129] because the limit ωτ → 0
has to be taken while keeping τ < ∞. Even though all recent
works agree that the nonlinear dc-conductivity has three major
components, i.e. nonlinear Drude , Berry curvature dipole ,
and quantum metric dipole (cf figure 6), it is no surprise that
16
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Figure 6. Physical features of nonlinear charge transport, which
couples to the average acceleration of the wavepacket motion. The
kinetic and anomalous parts of the motion can be understood either
in terms of semiclassical renormalizations to the Fermi velocity and
Berry curvature, or as deformations of the semiclassical
wavepacket. Finally, the triangle diagram gives rise to a triangle
anomaly which is of the mixed axial-gravitational type and results
in a longitudinal nonreciprocity in the current on the level of the
quantum metric dipole.
varying predictions have been made regarding the coefficients
and signs of the respective dc-conductivity terms [ 45, 52,
64, 65, 150, 151]. In the following, we present a particularly
simple perspective which emerges based on the renormalized
kinetic approach as well as Kubo formalism.
5.1 . Berry curvature and quantum metric dipole
We first elucidate within the renormalized kinetic approach
how nonlinear order anomalous transport including BCD and
QMD arise. Semiclassically, the current density in a material
can be expressed as:
j = −e
X
n
ˆ
k
fnvn (29)
where fn is the (non-equilibrium) distribution function of the
nth band, va
n is the velocity of the nth band in a-direction.
Momentum arguments will be suppressed throughout in this
section.
The external electric field E is considered as the perturba-
tion to the system, under which the evolution of the distribution
function fn(r, k, t) follows the Boltzmann transport equation,
i.e.
∂tfn − e E
 ̄h · ∇kfn + v · ∇rfn = − fn − f(0)
n
τ , (30)
where τ is the transport relaxation time and f(0)
n is the equilib-
rium distribution function of nth band, i.e. Fermi–Dirac dis-
tribution function. Under the assumption of a steady-state and
spatially uniform system, time and spatial derivative terms can
be excluded in equation ( 30) and the distribution function can
be solved perturbatively by expanding with respect to the amp-
litude of electric field: fn = f(0)
n + f(1)
n + f(2)
n + . . ., whose solu-
tion yields f(l)
n =
 eτ
 ̄h E · ∇k
l
f(0)
n .
Crucially, a determination of the current (equation ( 29))
also requires an expansion of vn with respect to the perturb-
ation. The velocity of an electron in nth band is given by the
semiclassical equation of motion [ 135], which also holds at
nonlinear order [ 51, 62]:
vn = 1
 ̄h ∇kεn − e
 ̄h E × Ωn. (31)
The first term 1
 ̄h ∇kεn represents the normal group velo-
city of semiclassical wavepacket, which only depends on the
energetics of band. The second term captures the anomal-
ous contribution due to Berry curvature Ωn. Under the per-
turbation of electric field ˆH ′ = −eˆr · E, the band dispersion
εn and the wavefunction |un⟩ as well as the Berry curvature
Ωn will be renormalized. They can also be formally expan-
ded with respect to E, denoted as εn = ε(0)
n + ε(1)
n + ε(2)
n + . . .
and Ωn = Ω(0)
n + Ω(1)
n + Ω(2)
n + . . ., which further results in
a renormalized velocity expanded as vn = v(0)
n + v(1)
n + v(2)
n +
. . ., where v(l)
n = 1
 ̄h
∂ε(l)
n
∂k − e
 ̄h E × Ω(l−1)
n . The renormalized dis-
persion and Berry curvature can be determined in perturbation
theory by a Schrieffer–Wolff (SW) transformation as detailed
in appendix D.1.
After inserting the renormalized quantities, the charge cur-
rent and the corresponding conductivity can be evaluated at
arbitrary order. Specifically, linear order and second order cur-
rent densities have the form,
j(1) = −e
ˆ
k
X
n
f(1)
n v(0)
n + f(0)
n v(1)
n (32)
j(2) = −e
ˆ
k
X
n
f(2)
n v(0)
n + f(1)
n v(1)
n + f(0)
n v(2)
n . (33)
For linear order current, these are the well-known Drude
term ( ∝ f(1)v(0)) and the anomalous velocity term ( ∝ v(1)),
where the former is proportional to relaxation time τ because
of linear order change in distribution function f(1) while the
anomalous velocity term does not carry an explicit depend-
ence on the relaxation time τ .
Similarly in the second order response, NLD term, BCD,
and QMD can be differentiated by their relaxation time
dependences, which originate from different ordered perturb-
ation on the distribution function as shown in figures 6(a)–
(c). After substituting the expression of renormalized velo-
city, the 2nd order transport conductivity then becomesσab;c ≡
σab;c
NLD + σab;c
BCD + σab;c
QMD, where each piece is given by [ 45, 50–
53, 62, 64, 65, 150, 151]
17
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
σab;c
NLD = − e3τ 2
 ̄h3
X
n
ˆ
k
fn∂a∂b∂cεn (34)
σab;c
BCD = e3τ
 ̄h2
X
n
ˆ
k
fn
1
2

∂aΩbc
n + ∂bΩac
n

(35)
σab;c
QMD = − e3
 ̄h
X
n
ˆ
k
fn

2∂cGab
n − 1
2

∂aGbc
n + ∂bGac
n

.
(36)
Here, the conductivities are already written exclusively in
terms of equilibrium band structure properties, i.e. all quantit-
ies are evaluated in the ground state and carry the superscript
□(0). Namely, this includes the equilibrium dispersion εn and
occupation function fn for band index n, as well as the band-
resolved Berry curvature Ωab
n and band-resolved, normalized
quantum metric Gab
n , defined as
Ωab
n =
X
m̸=n

ra
nmrb
mn − rb
nmra
mn

(37)
Gab
n =
X
m̸=n
ra
nmrb
mn + rb
nmra
mn
εnm
. (38)
Both Ωab
n and Gab
n are gauge invariant and contain only one
band index n, which means they are proper low energy quant-
ities. Of course, their definitions entail a sum over all other
bands, clearly identifying them as virtual interband contri-
butions. Additionally, we emphasize that Gab
n depends expli-
citly on the dispersion, which means that it cannot be purely
geometric—it is necessarily a mixed property of the system.
This has to be seen in distinction to the Berry curvature Ωab
n ,
which only depends on the wavefunctions.
We reiterate that NLD, BCD and QMD are each measurable
independently, and can for example be isolated by their life-
time dependence [66, 67]. We also mention that Kubo formal-
ism with two lifetime has been shown to reproduce the NLD,
BCD, and QMD terms [49], for further details cf appendixD.3.
5.2. Geometric interpretation and quantum anomaly
In the same way that the linear conductivity measures the semi-
classical mobility (drift velocity) of a wavepacket, the second-
order conductivity couples to the average acceleration that the
wavepacket is exposed to [ 152]. In particular, the anomalous
components created by the BCD and QMD encode an anomal-
ous acceleration which is created due to the intra-unit cell vari-
ation of the electron density that exerts forces on the extended
wavepacket which are not locally compensated all the time,
thus deforming the propagating state. This view is also com-
pletely in line with the observation that the BCD and QMD
derive from virtual interband transitions, i.e. they originate
from (virtual) changes of the total wavefunction, thus deform-
ing the real-space charge distribution.
This intuition can be made precise upon turning the non-
linear dc-conductivity according to equations ( 34)–(36) into
an integral over the Fermi surface by partial integration. Then,
the NLD term reads as a Fermi surface average over the k-
local effective mass of the quasiparticle, and thus measures
the skewness of the drift motion (cf figure 6(d)). Similarly,
the BCD weighs the Berry curvature on the Fermi surface
along the electric field directions, which results in an angular
momentum mismatch (figure6(e)). Finally, the QMD accounts
for the imbalance in the shift of the dispersion, which will
deform the local Fermi surface geometry, and thus the wave-
packet (figure 6(f)).
The fact that anomalous components of the motion derive
from virtual interband excitations also constitutes the phys-
ical mechanism for semiclassical manifestations of quantum
anomalies, for example for the chiral anomaly in Weyl semi-
metals [ 8, 153, 154]. A quantum anomaly denotes the non-
conservation of a charge even though it is conserved by the
classical action. The reason is that the measure in the quantum
statistical partition function is not invariant under the cor-
responding symmetry. One could say more sloppily that the
quantum fluctuations enable additional transitions which are
classically forbidden and which break the conservation law.
Quantum anomalies are frequently induced by triangle dia-
grams, so it is no surprise that the triangle diagram of the non-
linear conductivity gives rise to the mixed axial-gravitational
anomaly [103], which is normally only accessible in the pres-
ence of a temperature gradient [ 155–157]. The mixed axial-
gravitational anomaly results from a shift in the absolute value
of the free energy, and thus of the chemical potential. Such
a shift is supplied by the renormalization of the dispersion
in the QMD response, leading to a non-conservation of the
momentum-local neighborhood of a given point on the Fermi
surface. For illustration, consider a very simple band struc-
ture with two Fermi pockets. If the QMD is nonzero, it can
for example move one Fermi pocket up in energy, and one
down, which conserves total charge in accordance with the
global electrostatic requirements. However, the semiclassical
continuity equations for each of these (shifted, displaced and
resized) Fermi pockets will then be anomalous, allowing for
a small leakage current between them. Completely analogous
to the more well-known chiral anomaly, this leakage current
cannot be removed entirely unless one assumes that the scat-
tering between both Fermi pockets is very strong [ 103, 153],
which is the origin of the longitudinal QMD current.
5.3. Beyond semiclassics
In a band insulator, the Fermi surface contributions to the
conductivity (equations ( 34)–(36)) vanish. It is a question of
fundamental interest whether it is nonetheless possible for a
NQAHE to exist. This holds true in particular because it is
widely appreciated that at linear order the quantum Hall effect
and the QAH effect are highly analogous in terms of the trans-
port properties and quantized edge channels [ 135, 158].
This question has recently been answered in the posit-
ive [92]; a NQAHE can indeed arise both in time-reversal sym-
metric systems as well as in magnetic insulators, provided that
the band structure does not possess any spatial symmetries.
The latter property may be due to an intrinsically low internal
symmetry, or could be induced by strain.
Given these circumstances, the NQAHE current is then
j = E × σNQAHE, where σNQA is linear in electric field
18
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Table 5. Symmetry properties of nonlinear transport, listed for the
basic symmetry operations as explained in table 1. Checkmarks
denote allowed response types. A special case is the BCD for C3z
symmetry (denoted by the star), which is symmetry forbidden for all
in-plane (x–y plane) components, but allowed for out-of-plane
directions. Cyclic permutations of the indices are an inherent
symmetry only for the NLD term.
Symmetry P T PT C 3z (a ↔ b ↔ c)
Nonlinear Drude term 8 8 4 4 Inherent
Berry curvature dipole 8 4 8 8 ∗ Absent
Quantum metric dipole 8 8 4 4 Absent
and defined as
σa
NQAHE = e2
 ̄h
X
n
ˆ
k
εabcfn
 Ab
ε , vc + Sc + Ωc

nn
. (39)
The effect arises due to three operator renormalizations which
are all linear in the electric field and which are related to,
respectively, a velocity shift v, a positional shift S and finally
a Berry curvature shift Ω (cf appendix D.3).
Even though the NQAHE effect typically leads to a rather
small correction to the quantized response, it is nonetheless
noteworthy for the fact that it can even appear in a time-
reversal-breaking insulator with zero Chern number at linear
order. Furthermore, the appearance of σNQAHE shows that the
close agreement between Quantum Hall and QAH phenomen-
ology does not extend to all orders in the applied field. This
does make sense based on the fact that the Quantum Hall effect
is exactly linear in electric field, while such a property cannot
be expected from a dispersive band structure.
5.4. Symmetry separation
Similar to nonlinear optics, it is also possible to utilize the per-
mutation symmetry of the dc conductivity tensor and the sym-
metry of the material to separate the NLD, BCD, and QMD
contributions as detailed in table 5.
Regarding the role of inversion (P), time-reversal (T ), and
parity-time reversal (PT ) symmetries, let us reiterate that P-
symmetry disables all 2nd order charge current responses (cf
section 3.4). Regarding T - and PT -symmetry, as further elu-
cidated in appendix D.2, both NLD and QMD are odd under
time reversal transformation, while BCD is even. Therefore,
NLD and QMD can only be present in magnetic systems
where T is broken, while the BCD will be excluded in PT -
symmetric materials such as antiferromagnets.
Regarding pure rotational symmetries, although all 2nd-
order conductivity tensors share the same rotational trans-
formation properties, it is still possible to distinguish BCD
from NLD and QMD by C3z-symmetry. The reason is that
C3z-symmetry connects a pure Hall (transverse) conductivity
to a longitudinal component while BCD is a pure transverse
response, i.e.
σyy;x
BCD
C3z
= −σxx;x
BCD = 0. (40)
For magnetic point group symmetries such as CnT and
MT , we expect a separation of responses based on spatial
directions, similar to the behavior in the optical regime. For
instance, a MzT system is effectively T -symmetric in x–y
plane while being PT -symmetric in z-direction. Then in x–
y plane only BCD is allowed while in z-direction, only NLD
and QMD is allowed. Such separation of responses can also
be found for other (magnetic) point group symmetries. Their
effective symmetries in different sub-directions are detailed in
table 4.
Regarding the permutation symmetry of the conductivity
tensor, unlike in optical regime where nonlinear conductivity
can generally have both symmetric ( σ(a,b);c) and antisymmet-
ric (σ[a,b];c) part, the transport conductivity must be symmetric
when imposing (a ↔ b) permutation since ω → 0 eliminates
the difference between ω and −ω upon exchange of the spatial
indices of the electric field (cf appendix B.1.3). Additionally,
NLD has a fully permutation symmetry (a ↔ b ↔ c) since
σab;c
NLD ∝
 ́
k ∂a∂b∂cεk, which is notably absent in both BCD
and QMD. Therefore, even though NLD and QMD are both
present in a PT -symmetric system and contribute to both
the nonlinear Hall (transverse) and the longitudinal (nonre-
ciprocal) current, it is still possible to isolate certain pieces
by mixing and matching spatial components, for example to
distill the quantum metric effect [ 103]. This can be achieved
by measuring both transverse conductivity (e.g. σyy;x) and off-
axis conductivity (e.g. σxy;y) with the transport setup shown
in figure 3(b). Specifically, NLD contributes the same to both
two conductivity components, while QMD generally does
not, i.e.
σyy;x
NLD = σxy;y
NLD, σ yy;x
QMD ̸= σxy;y
QMD. (41)
5.5. Extrinsic effects
Finally, we emphasize that the dc-conductivity as given by
equations ( 34)–(36) only contains anomalous pieces due to
virtual interband processes. Additionally, there exist extrinsic
contributions due to quasiparticle scattering from impurities,
phonons, and collective modes. Qualitatively speaking, the
anomalous intrinsic parts of the motion are the result of virtual
(i.e. vertical) transitions involving different energies, while
extrinsic scattering leads to on-shell (horizontal) transitions
involving more than one momentum.
In close analogy to processes found for the first-order
extrinsic mechanisms [ 72, 118], nonlinear skew-scattering
and side-jump have been identified as major sources of the
extrinsic conductivity [ 121, 124]. Additionally, quantum kin-
etic approaches have discovered genuine second-order relaxa-
tion paths [56, 119, 122, 123, 159, 160]. The study of the role
of quantum geometry in such extrinsic processes is still in its
infancy, partially because the response function will invariably
depend on the microscopic details of the impurities or collect-
ive modes. However, some results are known. For example, in
case of a simple potential scatterer, skew and side-jump at lin-
ear order can be connected to the Pancharatnam phase [ 161].
Extrinsic processes often lead to currents comparable in
size to intrinsic ones and can by no means be neglected
19
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
unless some symmetry arguments exist which suppress them
or render them zero (cf for example [ 45, 72]). Nevertheless,
similar to Hall responses at linear order, recent works have
successfully disentangled intrinsic and extrinsic contribu-
tions [ 66, 67] by investigating the temperature scaling of the
nonlinear Hall conductivity versus the linear longitudinal con-
ductivity squared, which removes the leading order lifetime
dependence and thus helps to highlight the anomalous com-
ponents of the conductivity.
6. Summary
In this review, we elucidated the rich structure of nonlinear
charge responses using several, mutually complementing con-
cepts. The development of these concepts has been ignited and
fueled by rapid experimental progress, fertilizing a profound
reevaluation of the established intuition regarding the semi-
classical electron motion in the bulk solid and culminating in
the prediction of a range of novel nonlinear effects. At the same
time, the multi-faceted nature of the electron motion beyond
linear order has proven indispensable in the exploration and
characterization of modern layered and engineered quantum
materials, in particular in moving the observational techniques
towards measuring features of quantum geometry in nonlinear
quantum materials.
Looking forward, we firmly believe that further progress
can be expected from a close collaboration between experi-
mental and theoretical efforts. Currently, most theory estim-
ates are made a posteriori because it remains a major challenge
to render ab-initio models as well as effective low-energy
models quantitative and predictive. Only a joint theoretical/
experimental effort can reduce these uncertainties and estab-
lish protocols to isolate certain materials properties in tractable
fashion.
On the other hand, quantum geometry is rapidly devel-
oping into a valuable tool for a range of condensed matter
questions [1, 2], for which multicomponent/tensorial response
functions are the primary observational probe. The versatil-
ity of the concepts reviewed here have already sparked several
adjacent developments. For example, using similar methods
and language, it is possible to study nonlinear features with
added magnetic field [ 51, 139, 162]. Furthermore, extensions
exist for charge transport at third order in the field [ 132, 133],
which is relevant in monolayer graphene [ 97, 98] and in alter-
magnets [134].
Zooming out, as this review powerfully demonstrates it is
worthwhile and insightful to explore nonlinear response func-
tions because they give rise to genuine new effects that can
be connected not only with material-specific features, but also
with fundamental concepts at the very core of condensed mat-
ter physics.
Data availability statement
No new data were created or analysed in this study.
Acknowledgments
We thank Daniel Kaplan for fruitful discussions. T. H
acknowledges financial support by the European Research
Council (ERC) under grant QuantumCUSP (Grant Agreement
No. 101077020). B Y acknowledges the financial sup-
port by the European Research Council (ERC Consolidator
Grant ‘NonlinearTopo’, No. 815869) and the Israel Science
Foundation (ISF: 2932/21, 2974/23)
Appendix A. Notations
Let us briefly introduce the rationale and language behind non-
linear conductivities.
A.1 . Conventions for Fourier transforms
∂a ≡ ∂
∂ka
,
ˆ
[dω] ≡
ˆ
dω
2π ,
ˆ 
dDk

≡
ˆ
dDk
(2π)D . (A1)
For a time-dependent physical quantity O(t), we define its
Fourier component O(ω) as,
O (t) =
ˆ
[dω] e−iωtO (ω) , O (ω) =
ˆ
dteiωtO (t) . (A2)
For a spatial uniform, time-dependent electric fieldE(t) and
its corresponding vector potential A(t), we have,
Ea (t) = −∂tAa (t) . (A3)
Therefore,
Ea (ω) = i ωAa (ω) ⇔ Aa (ω) = Ea (ω)
i ω . (A4)
A.2. Definition of current and conductivity
We define different orders of conductivity in the time-domain
as,
ja (t) ≡
ˆ
dt1 σb1;a (t; t1) Eb1 (t1) + 1
2!
ˆ
dt1
ˆ
dt2 σb1b2;a (t; t1, t2) Eb1 (t1) Eb2 (t2) + . . . (A5)
Therefore, the conductivity can be formally expressed in functional derivative form,
σb1...bn;a (t; t1, . . . ,tn) = δnja (t)
δEb1 (t1) . . . δEbn (tn) . (A6)
20
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
The expression of current in frequency domain can be written as,
ja (ω) =
ˆ
dteiωtja (t)
=
ˆ
dteiωt
ˆ
dt1 σb1;a (t; t1) Eb1 (t1) + 1
2!
ˆ
dteiωt
ˆ
dt1
ˆ
dt2 σb1b2;a (t; t1, t2) Eb1 (t1) Eb2 (t2) + . . .
=
ˆ
[dω1] σb1;a (ω; ω1) Eb1 (ω1) + 1
2!
ˆ
[dω1]
ˆ
[dω2] σb1b2;a (ω; ω1, ω2) Eb1 (ω1) Eb2 (ω2) + . . .
(A7)
where we have defined the nth order conductivity in frequency domain as,
σb1...bn;a (ω; ω1, . . . , ωn) ≡
ˆ
. . .
ˆ
dtdt1 . . .dtneiωtσb1...bn;a (t; t1, . . . ,tn) e−iω1t1 . . .e−iωntn. (A8)
A.3. Continuous and discrete form of response theory
In standard 2nd order current response, the response can be
written as,
jc ( ̄ω) =
ˆ
[dω1]
ˆ
[dω2] σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) Ea (ω1) Eb (ω2) .
(A9)
To further simplify our notation, we consider a monochromatic
electric field,
Ea (t) = E a (ω) e−iωt + E a∗ (ω) eiωt
= [Re E a (ω) + i Im E a (ω)] (cos ωt − i sin ωt) + c.c.
= 2 [Re E a (ω) cos ωt + Im E a (ω) sin ωt] .
(A10)
Here ⃗E can be regarded as the amplitude vector of the elec-
tric field, then for linear polarized light in x direction, we
can use ⃗E(ω) = |⃗E|(1, 0, 0), for circular polarized light in x–
y plane propagating in z direction, we can use ⃗Eö/œ(ω) =
| ⃗E|√
2 (1, ±i, 0), where |⃗E| ≡
p
⃗E ∗ · ⃗E is half the amplitude of the
electric field.
Then the electric field in frequency domain can be written
as,
Ea (ω ′) =
ˆ
dteiω ′tEa (t)
=
ˆ
dteiω ′t
E a (ω) e−iωt + E a∗ (ω) eiωt
= 2π [E a (ω) δ (ω ′ − ω) + E a (−ω) δ (ω ′ + ω)] .
(A11)
Let us generalize this notation based on ⃗E into multi-frequency
{ωi} electric fields by writing,
Ea (t) =
X
i
E a (ωi) e−iωi t, (A12)
where we define E a(−ωi) = E a∗(ωi) to keep the electric field
real-valued. Then Ea(ω) has a discrete spectrum,
Ea (ω) = 2π
X
i
E a (ωi) δ (ω − ωi) . (A13)
The response formula is therefore in terms of the amplitude ⃗E
given by,
jc ( ̄ω) =
ˆ
[dω1]
ˆ
[dω2] σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) Ea (ω1) Eb (ω2)
=
ˆ
dω1
ˆ
dω2 σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2)
X
i,j
E a (ωi) E b (ωj) δ (ω1 − ωi) δ (ω2 − ωj)
=
X
i,j
σab;c ( ̄ω; ωi, ωj) E a (ωi) E b (ωj) .
(A14)
By time translational symmetry the conductivity is proportional to a delta function as well. This delta function can be resolved
by defining a similar discretized frequency spectrum description of current and conductivity,
jc (t) =
X
i
J c ( ̄ωi) e−iωi t, jc ( ̄ω) = 2π
X
i
J c (ωi) δ ( ̄ω −  ̄ωi) , σ ab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = 2π ςab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) δ ( ̄ω − ω1 − ω2) .
(A15)
21
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
This leads to the well-known discretized frequency spectrum
form of the second order current generation,
jc ( ̄ω) = 2π
X
i
J c (ωi) δ ( ̄ω −  ̄ωi)
= 2π
X
j,k
ς ab;c ( ̄ω; ωj, ωk) δ ( ̄ω − ωj − ωk) E a (ωj) E b (ωk) ,
(A16)
which is equivalent to,
J c ( ̄ωi = ωj + ωk) = ς ab;c ( ̄ω; ωj, ωk) E a (ωj) E b (ωk) . (A17)
This is just a transformation from the integral version of ori-
ginal continuous spectrum description into the summation
form of discrete spectrum description. To avoid adding com-
plexity in the use of letters in the formulas, in the main text
we treat E and E interchangeably, and uniformly write them
as E, understanding the meaning based on the specific con-
text. Different symbols will be used for distinction only when
necessary.
Appendix B. Symmetry of 2nd order optical
conductivity
Symmetries and symmetry operations are an important tool in
studying nonlinear conductivities. In the following we intro-
duce the main ingredients towards such an analysis.
B.1 . Intrinsic symmetry
B.1 .1 . Intrinsic permutation symmetry . Consider the 2nd
order current generation,
jc ( ̄ω) = σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) Ea (ω1) Eb (ω2) . (B1)
The intrinsic permutation symmetry of this response is
(a, ω1) ↔ (b, ω2), because changing the order of multiplic-
ation of Ea(ω1) and Eb(ω2) leaves the current invariant.
Therefore, the conductivity is symmetric with respect to this
exchange of indices,
jc ( ̄ω) = σba;c ( ̄ω; ω2, ω1) Eb (ω2) Ea (ω1) . (B2)
It follows for the conductivity that
σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = σba;c ( ̄ω; ω2, ω1) , (B3)
i.e. it is symmetric under the exchange(a, ω1) ↔ (b, ω2). In the
following we consider 2nd order dc current generation, where
ω1 = −ω2 = ω and  ̄ω = ω1 + ω2 = 0. In the language of adia-
batic switching, a finite quasiparticle lifetime enters through
the interband and intraband relaxation rates Γ and γ,
ω1,2 → ω1,2 + i Γ,  ̄ω →  ̄ω + i γ. (B4)
This yields,
σab;c ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2; {γ, Γ}) = σab;c ( ̄ω + iγ; ω1 + iΓ, ω2 + iΓ) .
(B5)
The 2nd order dc conductivity tensor thus becomes
σab;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) ≡ σab;c (0; ω, −ω; {γ, Γ})
= σab;c (iγ; ω + i Γ, −ω + iΓ) .
(B6)
In that case the intrinsic permutation symmetry assumes the
form,
σab;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) = σba;c
dc (−ω; {γ, Γ}) . (B7)
B.1 .2. Conjugation symmetry for dc-response. Since phys-
ical observables are always real-valued O∗(t) = O(t), in
the frequency domain it holds that O∗(ω) = O(−ω). For
dc current generation, such symmetry leads to jc( ̄ω = 0) =
jc∗(− ̄ω = 0), specifically,
jc ( ̄ω = 0) = σab;c ( ̄ω; −ω, ω; {γ, Γ}) Ea (−ω) Eb (ω)
= σab;c
dc (−ω; {γ, Γ}) Ea (−ω) Eb (ω)
= σba;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) Ea (−ω) Eb (ω)
= jc∗ (− ̄ω = 0) =

σdc
ba;c (ω; {γ, Γ})
∗
Ea∗ (ω) Eb∗
(−ω)
=

σdc
ab;c (ω; {γ, Γ})
∗
Ea (−ω) Eb (ω) .
(B8)
On the third line, we have implemented the intrinsic permuta-
tion symmetry σab;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) = σba;c
dc (−ω; {γ, Γ}) as dis-
cussed previously. Therefore the 2nd order dc conductivity
tensor respects the symmetry,
σba;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) =
h
σab;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ})
i∗
. (B9)
One can further separate the 2nd order dc conductivity into its
real and imaginary parts,
σab;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) ≡ σab;c
Re (ω; {γ, Γ}) + i σab;c
Im (ω; {γ, Γ}) .
(B10)
This yields a real symmetric and an imaginary antisymmetric
part of σab;c
dc upon exchanging electric field spatial index (a ↔
b), i.e.
σab;c
Re (ω; {γ, Γ}) = σba;c
Re (ω; {γ, Γ}) (B11)
σab;c
Im (ω; {γ, Γ}) = −σba;c
Im (ω; {γ, Γ}) . (B12)
B.1 .3. T ransport limit. The nonlinear transport limit is
reached upon taking ω → 0. According to the intrinsic per-
mutation symmetry,
σdc
ab;c (ω; {γ, Γ})

ω→0 = σdc
ba;c (−ω; {γ, Γ})

ω→0 . (B13)
Therefore,
σab;c
tr ≡ σab;c
dc (0; {γ, Γ}) = σba;c
dc (−ω; {γ, Γ}) = σba;c
tr , (B14)
or equivalently,
σab;c
tr = σ(ab);c
tr . (B15)
22
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
B.2. Linear and circular polarized light
Consider incident light with the electric field,
Ea (t) = E a (ω) e−iωt + E a∗ (ω) eiωt
= 2 [Re E a (ω) cos ωt + Im E a (ω) sin ωt] . (B16)
Without loss of generality, let the incident light propag-
ate along the +z direction and choose linear polarized light
to be E ↕(ω) = E0(cos φ, sin φ, 0), while circular polarization
is given by E ö(ω) = E0√
2 (1, i, 0) and E œ(ω) = E0√
2 (1, −i, 0).
Then according to the definition of 2nd-order BPVE conduct-
ivity tensor σab;c( ̄ω; ω, −ω), the 2nd-order dc current response
can be written as,
J c ( ̄ω = 0) = σab;c ( ̄ω = 0; ω, −ω) E a (ω) E b∗
(ω) (B16)
=

E x E y
σxx;c σxy;c
σyx;c σyy;c

E x∗
E y∗

. (B17)
Here, the frequency arguments have been omitted for simpli-
city. One can further simplify the above expression using the
symmetry of the conductivity tensor imposed by the dc current
generation,
σba;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ}) =
h
σab;c
dc (ω; {γ, Γ})
i∗
. (B18)
The conductivity matrix is therefore Hermitian and can be
rewritten as,
J c =

E x E y
σxx;c
Re σxy;c
Re + iσxy;c
Im
σxy;c
Re − iσxy;c
Im σyy;c
Re

E x∗
E y∗

.
(B19)
For linear polarized light, this yields
J c
↕ = σab;cE a
↕ (ω) E b
↕
∗
(ω)
= E2
0

cos φ sin φ

σxx;c
Re σxy;c
Re + iσxy;c
Im
σxy;c
Re − iσxy;c
Im σyy;c
Re

cos φ
sin φ

= E2
0

σxx;c
Re cos2 φ + σyy;c
Re sin2 φ + 2σxy;c
Re sin φ cos φ

,
(B20)
which only depends on the real part of the conductivity tensor.
For circular polarized light, the result is
J c
ö/œ = σab;cE a
ö/œ (ω) E b
ö/œ
∗
(ω)
= E2
0
2

1 ±i

σxx;c
Re σxy;c
Re + iσxy;c
Im
σxy;c
Re − iσxy;c
Im σyy;c
Re

1
∓i

= E2
0
2 [σxx;c
Re + σyy;c
Re ± 2σxy;c
Im ] . (B21)
Although the BPVE generated by circular polarized light
depends both on the real and imaginary parts of the conductiv-
ity tensor, the difference in the response between left and right
circular polarized light only depends on the imaginary part of
the conductivity tensor, which can be defined as,
J c
ö − J c
œ = 2E2
0σxy;c
Im . (B22)
B.3. Spacetime transformation and symmetry
B.3.1 . Spatial transformation and symmetry . Consider a
pure spatial transformation xa → x ′
a = Raa′xa′. The transform-
ation of the Hamiltonian is accordingly
ˆH → ˆH ′ = ˆR ˆH ˆR−1, (B23)
where ˆR is the matrix representation of the spatial transform-
ation R, which acts on a real space local basis as ˆR|r, α⟩ =P
α ′ Rαα ′
|r ′, α′⟩, where r ′a = (Rr)a ≡P
a′ Raa′
ra′
and
α, α′ indicate the orbital degree of freedom and Rαα ′ is the
matrix representation in the corresponding Hilbert space. In
momentum space, the transformation acts very similarly,
with ˆR|k, α⟩ =P
α ′ Rαα ′
|k ′, α′⟩, where k ′a
= (Rk)a ≡P
a′ Raa′
ka′
. Notably, one can express the transformation
of the position/momentum and the orbital degree of free-
dom separately as ˆR = ˆRR, where ˆR denotes the part of the
transformation which only acts in orbital space, whereas
the matrix R without operator hat only acts on spatial
coordinates/momenta.
Given eigenvalues and eigenstates for momentum k and
band index n satisfying ˆH|ψnk⟩ = εnk|ψnk⟩, the transformed
Hamiltonian ˆH ′ = ˆR ˆH ˆR−1 should therefore have the follow-
ing eigenvalues and eigenstates:
ˆH ′

ˆR|ψn,R−1k⟩

= ˆR ˆH ˆR−1 ˆR|ψn,R−1k⟩
= ˆR ˆH|ψn,R−1k⟩
= ˆRεn,R−1k|ψn,R−1k⟩
= εn,R−1k

ˆR|ψn,R−1k⟩

.
(B24)
Since

ˆR|ψn,R−1k⟩

must have the momentum R

R−1k

=
k, the corresponding eigenvalues for a specific momentum k
are ε ′
nk = εnR−1k and the corresponding eigenstate is |ψ ′
nk⟩ =
ˆR|ψn,R−1k⟩.
The transformation of the Bloch Hamiltonian ˆH(k) ≡
eik·ˆr ˆHe−ik·ˆr with momentum k, reads
ˆH (k) → ˆH ′ (k) = eik·ˆr ˆH ′e−ik·ˆr
= eik·ˆr R ˆR|{z}
ˆR
ˆH ˆR−1R−1
| {z }
ˆR−1
e−ik·ˆr
= eik·(Rˆr) ˆR ˆH ˆR−1e−ik·(Rˆr)
= ˆReiR−1k·ˆr ˆHe−iR−1k·ˆr ˆR−1
= ˆR ˆH

R−1k
 ˆR−1.
(B25)
To obtain line three, note that e ik·ˆrR = eik·(Rˆr), since
eik·ˆrR|r⟩ = eik·ˆr|Rr⟩ = eik·(Rr)|r⟩ = eik·(Rˆr)|r⟩. Similarly,
we have R−1e−ik·ˆr = e−ik·(Rˆr) by Hermitian conjugation.
Finally, the eigenvalues and eigenstates of the transformed
Bloch Hamiltonian are
23
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
ˆH ′ (k) |u ′
nk⟩ = ε ′
nk|u ′
nk⟩
⇔ ˆR ˆH

R−1k
 ˆR−1

ˆR|un,R−1k⟩

= ˆR ˆH

R−1k

|un,R−1k⟩
= εn,R−1k

ˆR|un,R−1k⟩

,
(B26)
confirming that the transformed eigenvalues and eigenstates
of the transformed Bloch Hamiltonian are ε ′
nk = εn,R−1k and
|u ′
nk⟩ = ˆR|un,R−1k⟩.
Next, we calculate the transformation of different matrix
elements. For example, the transformation of the dipole mat-
rix element (Berry connection) is,
ra
mn (k) ≡ ⟨umk|i ∂ka|unk⟩
→ r ′a
mn (k) = ⟨u ′
mk|i ∂ka|u ′
nk⟩
= ⟨ ˆRum,R−1k|i ∂ka| ˆRun,R−1k⟩
= ⟨um,R−1k| ˆR−1i ∂ka
ˆR|un,R−1k⟩
= ⟨um,R−1k|i ∂ka|un,R−1k⟩
=
X
b
∂

R−1k
b
∂ka
⟨um,R−1k|i ∂(R−1k)b
|un,R−1k⟩
=
X
b

R−1ba
rb
mn

R−1k

=
X
b
Rabrb
mn

R−1k

. (B27)
Here, it was assumed that the transformation on the orbital degree of freedom is k-independent, which is appropriate for a point
group symmetry operation ˆR (without translation). The dipole matrix element thus transforms like a vector field.
The transformation property of different orders of velocity matrix elements, i.e. va
mn, wab
mn, uabc
mn , or equivalently, the spatial
transformation of ha1...an
mn follow in the same fashion,
ha1...an
mn (k) ≡ ⟨umk|

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH (k)

|unk⟩
→ h ′a1...an
mn (k) ≡ ⟨u ′
mk|

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH ′ (k)

|u ′
nk⟩
= ⟨ ˆRum,R−1k|

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆR ˆH

R−1k
 ˆR−1

| ˆRun,R−1k⟩
=
X
b1,...,bn
Ra1b1 . . .Ranbn⟨um,R−1k|

∂(R−1k)b1
. . . ∂(R−1k)bn
ˆH

R−1k

|un,R−1k⟩
=
X
b1,...,bn
Ra1b1 . . .Ranbnhb1...bn
mn

R−1k

.
(B28)
In other words, the nth order velocity matrix element trans-
forms as an nth order tensor field. The spatial transformation
property of nonlinear conductivity is therefore,
σab;c → σ ′ab;c =
X
a′,b ′,c ′
Raa ′
Rbb ′
Rcc ′
σa′b ′;c ′
, (B29)
in line with the phenomenological expectation.
B.3.2. Time reversal transformation and symmetry .
Similarly, we can also analyze the time reversal transform-
ation property of the Hamiltonian, eigenvalues, eigenstates,
and different matrix elements. We denote the time reversal
operator as ˆT, which is an anti-unitary operator. The time
reversal transformed Hamiltonian is,
ˆH → ˆH ′ = ˆT ˆHˆT−1, (B30)
while the time reversal transformed Bloch Hamiltonian is,
ˆH (k) → ˆH ′ (k) = eik·ˆr ˆH ′e−ik·ˆr
= eik·ˆr ˆT ˆHˆT−1e−ik·ˆr
= ˆTe−ik·ˆr ˆHeik·ˆr ˆT−1
= ˆT ˆH (−k) ˆT−1.
(B31)
Here, note that the time reversal operator ˆT is anti-unitary,
which adds a complex conjugation when interchanging the
order of eik·ˆr and ˆT. The band dispersion and unit cell periodic
24
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Bloch states of the time reversal transformed Hamiltonian are
ε ′
nk = εn,−k and |u ′
nk⟩ = ˆT|un,−k⟩ respectively.
The time reversal transformation property of the dipole
matrix element (Berry connection) is then,
ra
mn (k) ≡ ⟨umk|i ∂ka|unk⟩
→ r ′a
mn (k) = ⟨u ′
mk|i ∂ka|u ′
nk⟩
= i ⟨ˆTum,−k|∂ka|ˆTun,−k⟩
= i ⟨ˆTum,−k|ˆT∂kaun,−k⟩
= i ⟨∂kaun,−k|um,−k⟩
= −i ⟨un,−k|∂kaum,−k⟩
= ⟨un,−k|i ∂(−k)a
um,−k⟩
= ra
nm (−k) . (B32)
Here again, the assumption being that the transformation on
the orbital degree of freedom is k independent, which is
appropriate for a point group symmetry operation ˆR (without
translation).
For the derivatives of the Bloch Hamiltonian ha1...an
mn , one
obtains similarly,
ha1...an
mn (k) ≡ ⟨umk|

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH (k)

|unk⟩
→ h ′a1...an
mn (k) ≡ ⟨u ′
mk|

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH ′ (k)

|u ′
nk⟩
= ⟨ˆTum,−k|ˆT

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH (−k)

ˆT−1|ˆTun,−k⟩
= ⟨ˆTum,−k|ˆT

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH (−k)

un,−k⟩
= ⟨

∂ka1
. . . ∂kan
ˆH (−k)

un,−k|um,−k⟩
= ⟨un,−k|

∂(−k)a1
. . . ∂(−k)an
ˆH (−k)

|um,−k⟩
= (−1)n ha1...an
nm (−k) . (B33)
As we see, velocity matrix elements with odd numbered order
are odd under time reversal transformation, while velocity
matrix elements with even numbered order are even under time
reversal transformation.
For the derivation of time reversal transformation of non-
linear conductivity, we also need the transformation proper-
ties of fFD
nm (k), va
nm(k), ∆c
nm(k), Rc
mn,a(k), and εnm(k). They are,
respectively,
fFD
T ,nm (k) = fFD (εT ,n (k)) − fFD (εT ,m (k))
= fFD (εn (−k)) − fFD (εm (−k))
= fFD
nm (−k)
= −fFD
mn (−k) (B34)
va
T ,nm (k) = −va
mn (−k) (B35)
∆c
T ,mn (k) = vc
T ,mm (k) − vc
T ,nn (k)
= [−vc
mm (−k)] − [−vc
nn (−k)]
= ∆c
nm (−k) (B36)
Rc
T ,mn,a (k)
=rc
T ,mm (k) − rc
T ,nn (k) + i ∂kc log ra
T ,mn (k)
=rc
mm (−k) − rc
nn (−k) + i ∂kc log ra
nm (k)
= − [rc
nn (−k) − rc
mm (−k) + i ∂−kc log ra
nm (−k)]
= − Rc
nm,a (−k) (B37)
εT ,nm (k) = εnm (−k) (B38)
Appendix C. Feynman diagrammatics
Here, we introduce the quantum perturbative analysis. Further
details can be found in [15, 37]. An applied electric field enters
via minimal coupling to the electric gauge potential,
ˆH0 (k) → ˆH ′ (k, t) = ˆH0

k − q
 ̄h A (t)

, (C1)
where q = −e is the charge of the electron, here we keep
the notation of q for smooth generalization of our theoretical
derivation to any kinds of charge carriers. The perturbation
expansion yields,
ˆH ′ (k, t) = ˆH0 (k) +
∞X
k=1
(−q/ ̄h)k
k! Ab1 (t) . . .Abk (t) ˆhb1...bk
(C2)
where ˆhb1...bk ≡ ∂b1 . . . ∂bk
ˆH0(k) and the Einstein summation
convention is used. The ˆhb1...bk’s constitute the electron–
photon interaction vertices. It is common to introduce new
notation for commonly used low order vertices and suppress
the momentum dependence, such as,
ˆva ≡ ˆha, ˆwab ≡ ˆhab, ˆuabc ≡ ˆhabc. (C3)
The current operator can be obtained by,
ˆJa (t) ≡ 1
V
δ ˆH ′
δAa (t)
= − q
V ̄h
∞X
k=1
(−q/ ̄h)k
k! Ab1 (t) . . .Abk (t) ˆhab1...bk. (C4)
Therefore the current generation vertices are the same as the
electron–photon interaction vertices.
25
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Figure 7 . Structrure of the Feynman diagrams for (1) linear and (2) second order conductivity. In the two (six) contributions at first (second)
the wavy lines connected to the ‘ ◦’ and ‘ ⊗’ represent the incoming and outgoing photons respectively, while the solid lines with arrows
represents the fermion propagators.
In imaginary time perturbation theory, the partition func-
tion is given by,
Z =
ˆ
D  ̄ψDψ exp
(
−
ˆ β
0
dτ
h
 ̄ψ

∂τ + ˆH ′

ψ
i)
. (C5)
The current expectation value is therefore,
⟨ˆJa (τ )⟩
= 1
Z
ˆ
D  ̄ψDψ ˆJa (t) exp
(
−
ˆ β
0
dτ
h
 ̄ψ

∂τ + ˆH ′

ψ
i)
= 1
Z
ˆ
D  ̄ψDψ δ ˆH ′
δAa (τ ) exp
(
−
ˆ β
0
dτ
h
 ̄ψ

∂τ + ˆH ′

ψ
i)
= − 1
Z
δZ
δAa (τ ) . (C6)
Transforming to the Matsubara frequency domain yields
⟨ˆJa (i νn)⟩ =
ˆ β
0
dτ eiνnτ ⟨ˆJa (τ )⟩ = − δ ln Z
δAa (−i νn) . (C7)
The susceptibility with respect to the vector potential in
Matsubara frequency domain is defined by,
⟨ˆJa (i  ̄ν)⟩
=
X
iν1
χb;a (i  ̄ν; i ν1) Ab (i ν1)
+ 1
2!
X
iν1
X
iν2
χb1b2;a (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) Ab1 (i ν1) Ab2 (i ν2) + . . .
(C8)
which is synonymous with the definition in terms of functional
derivatives,
χb;a (i  ̄ν; i ν1) = − δ2 ln Z
δAb (i ν1) δAa (−i  ̄ν)
χb1b2;a (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − δ3 ln Z
δAb1 (i ν1) δAb2 (i ν2) δAa (−i  ̄ν) .
(C9)
Here we can see thenth order susceptibility consists of connec-
ted Feynman diagrams (as imposed by the ln Z function) with
n incoming external photon lines with frequency ν1, ν2, . . .
(as imposed by δ
δAb(i ν1)
δ
δAb(i ν2) . . .), and one outgoing external
photon line with frequency  ̄ν (as imposed by δ
δAa(−i  ̄ν) ).
Let us calculate the susceptibility. The first order suscept-
ibility follows from two diagrams,
χb;a = χb;a
(1.A) + χb;a
(1.B), (C10)
where the susceptibilities are defined using the fermionic
Matsubara green’s function G(iω) = 1
i ̄hω−H0
,
26
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
χb;a
(1.A) (i  ̄ν; i ν1) = − 1
β
X
iωl
ˆ
k
Tr
 ˆwabG (i ωl)

δi ̄ν,iν1 (C11)
χb;a
(1.B) (i  ̄ν; i ν1) = − 1
β
X
iωl
ˆ
k
Tr
ˆvaG (i ν1 + i ωl) ˆvbG (i ωl)

δi ̄ν,iν1, (C12)
Similarly, the second order susceptibility is contributed by six diagrams that correspond to,
χb1b2;a = χb1b2;a
(2.A) + χb1b2;a
(2.B) + χb1b2;a
(2.C) + χb1b2;a
(2.D) + χb1b2;a
(2.E) + χb1b2;a
(2.F) , (C13)
where
χb1b2;a
(2.A) (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − 1
β
X
iωm
ˆ
k
Tr
ˆuab1b2G (i ωm)

δi ̄ν,iν1+iν2 (C14)
χb1b2;a
(2.B) (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − 1
β
X
iωm
ˆ
k
Tr
 ˆwab1G (i ν2 + i ωm) ˆvb2G (i ωm)

δi ̄ν,iν1+iν2 (C15)
χb1b2;a
(2.C) (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − 1
β
X
iωm
ˆ
k
Tr
 ˆwab2G (i ν1 + i ωm) ˆvb1G (i ωm)

δi ̄ν,iν1+iν2 (C16)
χb1b2;a
(2.D) (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − 1
β
X
iωm
ˆ
k
Tr
ˆvaG (i  ̄ν + i ωm) ˆwb1b2G (i ωm)

δi ̄ν,iν1+iν2 (C17)
χb1b2;a
(2.E) (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − 1
β
X
iωm
ˆ
k
Tr
ˆvaG (i  ̄ν + i ωm) ˆvb2G (i ν1 + i ωm) ˆvb1G (i ωm)

δi ̄ν,iν1+iν2 (C18)
χb1b2;a
(2.F) (i  ̄ν; i ν1, i ν2) = − 1
β
X
iωm
ˆ
k
Tr
ˆvaG (i  ̄ν + i ωm) ˆvb1G (i ν2 + i ωm) ˆvb2G (i ωm)

δi ̄ν,iν1+iν2. (C19)
We note that the topology of the diagrams up to second order do not lead to nontrivial multiplicities [ 37].
After analytical continuation iν → ω + i 0+, this yields the susceptibility for real frequencies. In order to obtain the conduct-
ivity, note that Ea(ω) = i ωAa(ω), which leads to the conductivity,
σb1...bn;a ( ̄ω; {ωi}) = χb1b2;a (i ̄ν →  ̄ω + i 0+; {i νi → ωi + i 0+})Qn
i =1 (i ωi) . (C20)
We introduce the Fermi–DIrac distribution fm ≡ 1
eβ ̄h(εm−μ)+1 of band m where μ is the chemical potential and β−1 = kBT for
temperature T. Restoring the electric charge and Planck constant, the 2nd order conductivity then becomes,
σb1b2;a
(2.A) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
n
ˆ
k
fnub1b2a
nn (C21)
σb1b2;a
(2.B) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnmvb2
nmwab1
mn
ω2 + εnm + i 0+ (C22)
σb1b2;a
(2.C) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnmvb1
nmwab2
mn
ω1 + εnm + i 0+ (C23)
σb1b2;a
(2.D) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnmwb1b2
nm va
mn
 ̄ω − εmn + i 0+ (C24)
27
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
σb1b2;a
(2.E) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
nml
ˆ
k
 
fnmvb2
nmvb1
mlva
ln
(ω2 + εnm + i 0+)( ̄ω − εln + i 0+) − fnmvb1
nmva
mlvb2
ln
(ω1 + εnm + i 0+)( ̄ω − εml + i 0+)
!
(C25)
σb1b2;a
(2.F) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
nml
ˆ
k
 
fnmvb1
nmvb2
mlva
ln
(ω1 + εnm + i 0+)( ̄ω − εln + i 0+) − fnmvb2
nmva
mlvb1
ln
(ω2 + εnm + i 0+)( ̄ω − εml + i 0+)
!
. (C26)
A more compact and symmetric notation reads
σb1b2;a
(2.A) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
n
ˆ
k
fn
ub1b2a
nn
2 + (b1, ω1 ↔ b2, ω2) (C27)
σb1b2;a
(2.B)+(2.C) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
n
ˆ
k
fn
 vb1
ω1 + ε + i 0+ , wab2

nn
+ (b1, ω1 ↔ b2, ω2) (C28)
σb1b2;a
(2.D) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
n
ˆ
k
fn
2

wb1b2, va
 ̄ω − ε + i 0+

nn
+ (b1, ω1 ↔ b2, ω2) (C29)
σb1b2;a
(2.E)+(2.F) ( ̄ω; ω1, ω2) = − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
X
n
ˆ
k
fn
 vb1
ω1 + ε + i 0+ ,

vb2, va
 ̄ω − ε + i 0+

nn
+ (b1, ω1 ↔ b2, ω2) . (C30)
Here the infinitesimal imaginary part in the denominator is the inverse interband/intraband lifetime, which is detailed in
appendix D.3.
Appendix D. Comments on nonlinear transport
conductivity
The literature on nonlinear transport is extensive [ 50–52, 54–
56, 62–65, 91, 92, 103], with various different approaches
leading to similar but not identical results [ 45, 50–53, 60,
62, 64, 65, 150, 151]. For the sake of clarity, in the follow-
ing we elucidate the main steps towards the semiclassical and
quantum perturbative calculations, emphasizing the underly-
ing ingredients rather than the technical aspects. The argu-
mentation mostly follows [ 64, 92].
D.1 . Semiclassical formalism
D.1 .1 . SW transformation. As mentioned above, second
order response requires eigenvalues up to the 3rd order per-
turbative correction, i.e. O(E3), and wavefunction up to the
2nd order, i.e. O(E2).
One way to avoid a painstaking derivation of higher-order
perturbation theory, is to implement a SW transformation,
which changes the wave function basis, transforming the low-
est order perturbation to the same order of O(E2), i.e.
H → H ′ ≡ eSHe−S, |n⟩ → |n ′⟩ ≡ eS|n⟩ (D1)
H ′ = H ′
0 + H ′
1 (D2)
H ′
1 = O

E2
. (D3)
In the new basis, the perturbative expansions of the eigenvalue
and eigenstate only require the 2nd order eigenvalue and 1st
order eigenstate perturbation theory for H′ to cover O(E3) for
the former and O(E2) for the latter. Throughout the discus-
sion below, the prime ′ represents the eigenstates and operat-
ors after the SW transformation.
Let us first separate the Hamiltonian H into diagonal and
off-diagonal parts,
H = H(0) + eE · r ≡ H0 + H1 (D4)
where H(0) is the original lattice Hamiltonian, and H0, H1
correspond to the diagonal and off-diagonal parts of the full
Hamiltonian after applying the external field, which read
explicitly,
H0 = H(0) +
X
n,k

eE · ⟨ψ(0)
nk |r|ψ(0)
nk ⟩

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
nk |
=
X
n,k

ε(0)
n (k) + eE · A(0)
nn (k)

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
nk | (D5)
H1 =
X
k̸=k ′
X
n̸=m

eE · ⟨ψ(0)
nk |r|ψ(0)
mk ′⟩

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
mk ′|
=
X
k
X
n̸=m

eE · ⟨ψ(0)
nk |r|ψ(0)
mk ⟩

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
mk |
≡
X
k
X
n̸=m

eE · A(0)
nm (k)

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
mk |. (D6)
Here, ε(n)
n (k), |ψ(0)
nk ⟩ represent the eigenvalues and eigenstates
(Bloch wavefunction) of the nth band at crystal momentum k
of the original Hamiltonian H(0) before applying the electric
field, and A(0)
nm (k) denotes the (0th order) Berry connection.
We emphasize that the upper index (. . .)(n) indicates con-
sidering eE · r as the perturbation, since we only know about
the dispersion ε(0)
n (k) and the eigenstate (Bloch wavefunction)
28
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
|ψ(0)
nk ⟩, so we have to transform all the quantities we want to
calculate into forms of (. . .)(n).
To this end, we write the SW transformation as,
H ′ = eεSHe−εS, (D7)
and we regard the perturbative parameter ε as the marker for
the order of the original perturbation theory (i.e. ε ∝ |E|).
The separation of the diagonal and off-diagonal parts of H
now becomes,
H = H0 + εH1. (D8)
One can check the correspondence of the order of the perturb-
ation theory both before and after the SW transformation by
expanding the SW transformation order by order with respect
to the parameter ε,
H ′ =
∞X
n=0
εn
n! [S, [S, . . . ,[S, H] . . .]]| {z }
nnested commutators
= H + ε [S, H] + ε2
2! [S, [S, H]] + ε3
3! [S, [S, [S, H]]] + . . .
= H0 + ε (H1 + [S, H0]) + ε2

[S, H1] + 1
2 [S, [S, H0]]

+ . . . (D9)
This imposes consistency conditions on the operator S, which
should also be anti-Hermitian to guarantee the SW trans-
formation is unitary. To enforce that the SW-transformed
Hamiltonian has a perturbation term only at order O(E2) ∼
O(ε2), it should hold that
H1 + [S, H0] = 0. (D10)
As long as S has the same discrete translational symmetry
as H(0), we can write the operator S in the Bloch basis, which
is block diagonal in momentum space,
S =
X
k
X
n,m
Snm|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
mk |, (D11)
where the matrix element is Snm ≡ ⟨ψ(0)
nk |S|ψ(0)
mk ⟩. We can also
write this constraint in the basis of |ψ(0)
nk ⟩ as:
X
k
X
n̸=m

eE · A(0)
nm

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
mk |
+
X
k
X
n,m
h
Snm

ε(0)
m (k) + eE · A(0)
mm (k)

−

ε(0)
n (k) + eE · A(0)
nn (k)

Snm
i
|ψ(0)
nk ⟩⟨ψ(0)
mk |
= 0. (D12)
The diagonal part is identically fulfilled by choosing Snn = 0,
while the off-diagonal part reads,
eE · A(0)
nm + Snm

ε(0)
m (k) + eE · A(0)
mm (k)

−

ε(0)
n (k) + eE · A(0)
nn (k)

Snm = 0, (D13)
which has the solution,
Snm = −eE · A(0)
nm
ε(0)
nm − eE · (An − Am)
≈ −eE · A(0)
nm
ε(0)
nm| {z }
O(E)
− e2EaEbAa
nm

Ab
n − Ab
m


ε(0)
nm
2
| {z }
O(E2)
+O

E3
≡ εS(1)
nm + ε2S(2)
nm + O

E3
(D14)
where ε(0)
nm ≡ ε(0)
n − ε(0)
m .
With this choice of S, the expression for H′ is simplified to,
H ′ = H0 + 1
2 ε [S, H1] + 1
3 ε [S, [S, H1]] + . . .
= H0 + 1
2 ε2
h
S(1), H1
i
+ ε3
 1
2
h
S(2), H1
i
+ 1
3
h
S(1),
h
S(1), H1
ii
+ O

E4
= H0 + H ′
1|{z}
O(E2)
. (D15)
Now, the unperturbed part of the SW-transformed Hamiltonian
can be regarded as the diagonal part of the original
Hamiltonian H0, whose unperturbed eigenstates are just
|ψ(0)
nk ⟩, and the corresponding eigenvalues are (ε(0)
n − eE ·
A(0)
nn ). We have transformed the perturbation Hamiltonian into
a O(E2) term.
Thus, the 1st order perturbation theory for this SW-
transformed Hamiltonian is enough to tell us the correction
of dispersion up to 3rd order, i.e. ε(3)
n [134]. Since the per-
turbation is O(E2) and contains O(E4), the correction of the
dispersion up to ε(4)
n will contain contributions from both the
1st order perturbation theory’s O(E4) term and the 2nd order
perturbation theory’s (H ′
1)2 ∼ O(E4) term. However, this dis-
cussion is complex and will not be covered here. Additionally,
since the SW transformation is unitary, the calculation yields
the same eigenvalue for the original Hamiltonian H.
D.1 .2. Correction of band dispersion. We calculate the cor-
rection to eigenvalues order by order. The SW-transformed
Hamiltonian’s 0th order eigenvalue already contains
O(E0) and O(E1) corrections for the original Hamiltonian
eigenvalues:
ε(1)
n = −eEaAa
nn. (D16)
The SW-transformed Hamiltonian’s 1st order eigenvalue
contains the O(E2) correction, where ε(2)
n is:
29
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
ε(2)
n = ⟨ψ(0)
nk | 1
2 ε2
h
S(1), H1
i
|ψ(0)
nk ⟩
= 1
2
X
m̸=n
εS(1)
nm

−eE · A(0)
mn

−

−eE · A(0)
nm

εS(1)
mn
= 1
2 e2EaEb
0
@X
m̸=n
Aa
nmAb
mn + Ab
nmAa
mn
ε(0)
nm
1
A . (D17)
Here, the ath component of unperturbed Berry connection has
been abbreviated as Aa
nm = (A(0)
nm )a.
D.1 .3. Correction of wave function and Berry connection.
The correction to the wave function corresponds to
|n⟩ ≡ e−S|n ′⟩
= |n ′⟩ − S|n ′⟩ + 1
2! S2|n ′⟩ + . . .
=

|n(0)⟩ + O

E2
− S

|n(0)⟩ + O

E2
+ O

E2
= |n(0)⟩ − S|n(0)⟩ + O

E2
. (D18)
Here, |n⟩ is the eigenstate of the original perturbed system
(before the SW transformation), and |n ′⟩ is the eigenstate
of the Hamiltonian after the SW transformation. We’ve used
the fact that |n ′⟩ is |n(0)⟩ up to O(E2) and S ∼ O(E), where
|n(0)⟩ represents the eigenstate of the original unperturbed
Hamiltonian.
The corrected Berry connection is,
Anm = ⟨ψnk|r|ψmk⟩
=

⟨ψ(0)
nk | − ⟨ψ(0)
nk |S† + O

E2
× r

|ψ(0)
nk ⟩ − S|ψ(0)
nk ⟩ + O

E2
= A(0)
nm|{z}
O(E0)
+ ⟨ψ(0)
nk | [S, r] |ψ(0)
mk ⟩| {z }
O(E1)
+O

E2
. (D19)
Therefore, the 1st order correction to the Berry connection
reads explicitly,

A(1)
nm
b
= ⟨ψ(0)
nk |
h
S(1), rb
i
|ψ(0)
mk ⟩
=
X
l
S(1)
nl

A(0)
lm
b
−

A(0)
nl
b
S(1)
lm
= −eEaX
l

A(0)
nl
a
A(0)
lm
b
ε(0)
nl
−

A(0)
nl
b
A(0)
lm
a
ε(0)
lm
= −eEaGab
nm. (D20)
The quantity Gab
nm ≡P
l(A(0)
nl )a(A(0)
lm )b/ε(0)
nl − (A(0)
nl )b
(A(0)
lm )a/ε(0)
lm is defined as the (non-Abelian) band-normalized
quantum metric. For response up to 2nd order, we only need
its diagonal (Abelian) part, i.e. the Band-normalized Quantum
metric of the nth band,
Gab
n ≡
X
m̸=n

A(0)
nm
a
A(0)
mn
b
+

A(0)
nm
b
A(0)
mn
a
ε(0)
nm
. (D21)
The corresponding 1st order correction of Berry curvature
is,

Ω(1)
n
c
= εabc∂a

A(1)
nn

= −eEdεabc∂aΩdb
n , (D22)
where εabc is the Levi-Civita tensor.
This completes the semiclassical perspective, which after
some algebra results in equations (34)–(36) quoted in the main
text.
D.2. Spacetime transformation and symmetry
With the knowledge of the spatial transformation property
of dipole and velocity matrix elements, one can straightfor-
wardly deduce the symmetry of Drude, BCD and QMD. To
this end, consider the symmetry of Berry curvature and band-
normalized quantum metric,
Ωab
n =
X
m̸=n

ra
nmrb
mn − rb
nmra
mn

(D23)
Gab
n =
X
m̸=n
ra
nmrb
mn + rb
nmra
mn
εnm
. (D24)
As explained in appendix B, the spatial transformation of
dipole matrix element behave like a vector field,
ra
nm (k) → r ′a
nm (k) =
X
b
Rabrb
nm

R−1k

. (D25)
The spatial transformation of energy (difference) behaves like
a scalar field,
εnm (k) → ε ′
nm (k) = εnm

R−1k

. (D26)
Thus, the Berry curvature and band-normalized quantum
metric both transform as rank two tensors,
Ωab
n (k) → Ω ′ab
n (k) =
X
a′b ′
Raa ′
Rbb ′
Ωa′b ′
n

R−1k

, (D27)
Gab
n (k) → G ′ab
n (k) =
X
a′b ′
Raa ′
Rbb ′
Ga′b ′
n

R−1k

. (D28)
Regarding the pure spatial transformation of NLD, BCD and
QMD, we conclude that they are all cubic in the dipole mat-
rix element rnm and momentum derivative ∂k. Therefore, the
pure spatial transformation property of NLD, BCD and QMD
behave like a 3rd rank order tensor field.
30
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Turning to the time reversal transformation, the dipole mat-
rix element reads
ra
nm (k) → r ′a
nm (k) = ra
mn (−k) (D29)
while the energy (difference) is
εnm (k) → ε ′
nm (k) = εnm (−k) . (D30)
The time reversal transformation of Berry curvature and band-
normalized quantum metric then follow as,
Ωab
n (k) → Ω ′ab
n (k)
=
X
m̸=n
h
r ′a
nm (k) r ′b
mn (k) − r ′b
nm (k) r ′a
mn (k)
i
=
X
m̸=n

ra
mn (−k) rb
nm (−k) − rb
nm (−k) ra
mn (−k)

=
X
m̸=n

rb
nm (−k) ra
mn (−k) − ra
mn (−k) rb
nm (−k)

= Ωba
n (−k) = −Ωab
n (−k) (D31)
Gab
n (k) → G ′ab
n (k)
=
X
m̸=n
r ′a
nm (k) r ′b
mn (k) + r ′b
nm (k) r ′a
nm (k)
ε ′nm (k)
=
X
m̸=n
ra
mn (−k) rb
nm (−k) + rb
nm (−k) ra
mn (−k)
εnm (−k)
=
X
m̸=n
rb
nm (−k) ra
mn (−k) + ra
mn (−k) rb
nm (−k)
εnm (−k)
= Gba
n (−k) = Gab
n (−k) . (D32)
Combining both transformations, we note that the Berry
curvature is odd under PT transformation, i.e.
Ωab
n (k)
T
− → −Ωab
n (−k)
P
− → −Ωba
n (k) . (D33)
Therefore if the system has PT symmetry, the Berry curvature
should be zero, which directly rules out the BCD term in the
2nd order dc conductivity. As an instructive example, we ana-
lyze the QMD term,
σab;c
QMD ≡ − e3
 ̄h
X
n
ˆ
k
fn (k)

2∂cGab
n (k) − 1
2

∂aGbc
n (k) + ∂bGac
n (k)

(D34)
→ σ ′ab;c
QMD = − (−1) e2
 ̄h3
X
n
ˆ
k
fn (−k)

2∂(−k)c
Gab
n (−k) − 1
2

∂(−k)a
Gbc
n (−k) + ∂(−k)b
Gac
n (−k)

= −σab;c
QMD. (D35)
In conclusion, the NLD and QMD terms are odd under time
reversal transformation, while the BCD term is even under
time reversal transformation, which means NLD and QMD
terms can only appear when time reversal symmetry is broken.
D.3. Quantum perturbative approach
We elucidate the two key steps how the dc-limit can be taken
in a Green–Kubo approach, leading back to the same result of
equations (34)–(36) obtained from the semiclassical approach.
D.3.1 . Expanding velocity vertices. In the diagrammatic
approach, all geometric information is contained in different
orders of velocity vertices, e.g. ˆva, ˆwab, and ˆuabc. However,
they the quantum geometric quantities are far from explicit in
these vertices. Namely, the Berry connection ra, the quantum
metric gab, the Berry curvature Ωab, the QC Qa;bc, the BCD
∂kcΩab, and the QMD ∂kcgab have to be first extracted by sum
rules.
To this end, note that the geometric quantities are essen-
tially momentum derivatives of the wavefunction, e.g. ∂k|m⟩
rather than derivatives of the Hamiltonian ∂k . . . ∂k ˆH(k), the
latter of which contains both dispersion εm and wavefunction
information |m⟩.
The crucial ingredient is the covariant derivative [ 37, 100],
which connects the matrix element of momentum derivative to
the momentum derivative of matrix elements in Bloch basis,
i.e.
31
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review

∂a ˆO

mn
= ⟨m|∂a
 X
m′n ′
|m ′⟩Om′n ′⟨n ′|
!
|n⟩
=
X
m′n ′
⟨m|∂am ′⟩Om′n ′⟨n ′|n⟩ +
X
m′n ′
⟨m|m ′⟩∂aOm′n ′⟨n ′|n⟩ +
X
m′n ′
⟨m|m ′⟩Om′n ′⟨∂an ′|n⟩
= ∂aOmn +
X
m′
⟨m|∂am ′⟩Om′n +
X
n′
Omn′⟨∂an ′|n⟩
= ∂aOmn + i
h
ˆO, ˆr
i
mn
, (D36)
where the Berry connection ˆr is, as usual given by,
ra
mn ≡ i ⟨m|∂an⟩ = −i ⟨∂am|n⟩, (D37)
which follows from 0 = ∂a(⟨m|n⟩) = ⟨∂am|n⟩ + ⟨m|∂an⟩. The
matrix element of commutator should be understood as,
h
ˆA, ˆB
i
mn
=
X
m′
(Amm′Bm′n − Bmm′Am′n) . (D38)
Then we can start from analyzing the 1st order velocity ver-
tex ˆva,
va
mn =

∂a ˆH

mn
= ∂aHmn + i
h
ˆH, ˆra
i
mn
= ∂aεnδmn + i (ˆε ◦ ˆr)mn .
(D39)
Here we used the property that the Bloch Hamiltonian is
undoubtedly diagonal in the Bloch basis, i.e. Hmn = εnδmn.
Hadamard product ◦ denotes the element-wise product of two
matrices, ( ˆA ◦ ˆB)mn = AmnBmn. The matrix element of ˆε is the
energy difference between different bands, (ˆε)mn = εm − εn.
The expected geometric content in anth-order vertex is thus
a collection of at mostn number of pure momentum derivatives
of Bloch wavefunctions. In order to capture this, we define a
(gauge-dependent) higher-order derivative via
Λa1...an
mn ≡ i
2 (⟨m|∂a1 . . . ∂ann⟩ − ⟨∂a1 . . . ∂anm|n⟩) . (D40)
At first order this is just the Berry connection, i.e. Λa
mn = ra
mn,
while the second order gauge-dependent geometric quantity
becomes,
λa1a2
mn ≡ Λa1a2
mn ≡ i
2 (⟨m|∂a1∂a2n⟩ − ⟨∂a1∂a2m|n⟩) . (D41)
Now we keep on expanding higher order velocity vertices,
the matrix elements of the second order velocity vertex ˆwa1a2
is,
wab
mn =

∂aˆvb
mn
= ∂avb
mn + i
ˆvb, ˆra
mn
= ∂a

∂bεnδmn + i

ˆε ◦ ˆrb
mn

+ i

∂bεnδmn + i

ˆε ◦ ˆrb
, ˆrb
mn
= ∂a∂bεnδmn + i ∂a

ˆε ◦ ˆrb
mn + i (∂aεmn) rb
mn −

ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
mn
= ∂a∂bεnδmn + i

ˆ∆a ◦ ˆrb + ˆ∆b ◦ ˆra

mn
+ i εmn∂arb
mn −

ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
mn (D42)
where the velocity shift is ∆a
mn ≡ ∂aεmn = ∂aεm − ∂aεn = va
mm − va
nn.
Y et, the second order velocity vertex, can also be expanded for(a ↔ b), i.e. ˆwab = ∂bˆva. Both expressions are not manifestly
the same because the expansion in terms of ˆra breaks the explicit permutation symmetry in spatial indices a and b. We can
recover such explicit permutation symmetry by manually symmetrizing the expansion in terms of (a ↔ b), which affects both
i εmn∂arb
mn and −[ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆrb]mn which are not symmetric under (a ↔ b). A useful organizing principle is to introduce a higher
order analogue to the Berry curvature as,
 ̃Ωab,N
mn ≡
 i

ˆεN ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
mn if N even
ˆεN ◦ ˆrb, ˆra
mn if N odd (D43)
it is easy to see that the zeroth order generalized Berry curvature is just the ordinary Berry curvature, i.e.  ̃Ωab,0
mn = Ωab
mn. The
derivative of the position operator is then,
32
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
∂bra
mn = i
2 ∂b (⟨m|∂an⟩ − ⟨∂am|n⟩)
= i
2 (⟨m|∂a∂bn⟩ − ⟨∂a∂bm|n⟩) + i
2 (⟨∂bm|∂an⟩ − ⟨∂am|∂bn⟩)
= λab
mn + i
2
X
l
(⟨∂bm|l⟩⟨l|∂an⟩ − ⟨∂am|l⟩⟨l|∂bn⟩)
= λab
mn + i
2
X
l

rb
mlra
ln − ra
mlrb
ln

= λab
mn − 1
2 Ωab
mn. (D44)
In this notation, the first term is symmetric while the second term is antisymmetric under (a ↔ b). Symmetrizing the second
order vertex thus yields,
wab
mn = 1
2

(∂bˆra)mn + (a ↔ b)

= ∂a∂bεnδmn + i

ˆ∆a ◦ ˆrb + ˆ∆b ◦ ˆra

mn
+ i

ˆε ◦ ˆλab

mn
− 1
2

 ̃Ωab,1
mn +  ̃Ωba,1
mn

. (D45)
The remaining expansions follow the same principles. For example, the diagonal matrix elements of the third order velocity
vertex ˆuabc read (note that εnn = 0, ∆a
nn = 0),
uabc
nn = ∂cwab
nn + i

wab, ˆrc
nn
= ∂a∂b∂cεn − 1
2 ∂c

 ̃Ωab,1
nn +  ̃Ωba,1
nn

| {z }
∂cwabnn
−
h
ˆ∆a ◦ ˆrb + ˆ∆b ◦ ˆra, ˆrc
i
nn
− i
2
h
 ̃Ωab,1 +  ̃Ωba,1, ˆrc
i
nn
−
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλab, ˆrc
i
nn| {z }
i [wab,ˆrc]nn
. (D46)
We mention in passing that only the∂cwab
nn part is needed when deriving the 2nd order conductivity, since thei [wab, ˆrc]nn part will
be canceled by diagram (2.D) that contributes a i [ˆrc, wab]nn term. Additionally, for a fully filled band (insulator) with fn = 1or 0,
it is
 ́
k fn∂cwab
nn = 0.
The last ingredient is the expansion of the momentum derivative of generalized Berry curvature, i.e.
∂c  ̃Ωab,1
nn = ∂c

ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
nn
=
h
ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
i
nn
+

ˆε ◦ ∂cˆra, ˆrb
nn +

ˆε ◦ ˆra, ∂cˆrb
nn
=
h
ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
i
nn
+

ˆε ◦

ˆλca + 1
2
 ̃Ωca,0

, ˆrb

nn
+

ˆε ◦ ˆra,

ˆλcb + 1
2
 ̃Ωcb,0

nn
. (D47)
Using the property
h
ˆε ◦ ˆA, ˆB
i
nn
=
h
ˆε ◦ ˆB, ˆA
i
nn
, it is,
∂c  ̃Ωab,1
nn =
h
ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλca, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆλcb
i
nn
+ i
2

ˆε ◦ [ˆrc, ˆra] , ˆrb
nn + i
2

ˆε ◦
ˆrc, ˆrb
, ˆra
nn
=
h
ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλca, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆλcb
i
nn
− i
2
nh
ˆrb,
h
ˆH, [ˆrc, ˆra]
ii
nn
+ (a ↔ b)
o
. (D48)
With the help of the Jacobi identities for nested commutators,
0 =
h
ˆA,
h
ˆB, ˆC
ii
+
h
ˆB,
h
ˆC, ˆA
ii
+
h
ˆC,
h
ˆA, ˆB
ii
, (D49)
0 =
h
ˆA,
h
ˆB,
h
ˆC, ˆD
iii
+
h
ˆB,
h
ˆC,
h
ˆD, ˆA
iii
+
h
ˆC,
h
ˆD,
h
ˆA, ˆB
iii
+
h
ˆD,
h
ˆA,
h
ˆB, ˆC
iii
, (D50)
one obtains
−
h
ˆrb,
h
ˆH, [ˆrc, ˆra]
ii
nn
=
h
ˆH,
ˆrc,
ˆra, ˆrbi
nn
+
h
ˆrc,
h
ˆra,
h
ˆrb, ˆH
iii
nn
+
h
ˆra,
h
ˆrb,
h
ˆH, ˆrc
iii
nn
. (D51)
33
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
Therefore, we can rewrite the expression of ∂c  ̃Ωab,1
nn as,
∂c  ̃Ωab,1
nn =
h
ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλca, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆλcb
i
nn
+ i
2
8
>><
>>:
2
64 ˆH,
2
64ˆrc,
ˆra, ˆrb
| {z }
+(a↔b)=0
3
75
3
75
nn
+
2
664ˆrc,
h
ˆra,
h
ˆrb, ˆH
ii
| {z }
 ̃Ωba,1
3
775
nn
+
2
664ˆra,
h
ˆrb,
h
ˆH, ˆrc
ii
| {z }
−  ̃Ωcb,1
3
775
nn
+ (a ↔ b)
9
>>=
>>;
=
h
ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλca, ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆε ◦ ˆra, ˆλcb
i
nn
+ i
2
n
−
h
 ̃Ωba,1, ˆrc
i
nn
+
h
 ̃Ωcb,1, ˆra
i
nn
+ (a ↔ b)
o
. (D52)
The final expression of uabc
nn is then, after some lengthy algebra,
uabc
nn = ∂a∂b∂cεn +
h
ˆrc, ˆ∆a ◦ ˆrb
i
nn
+
h
ˆra, ˆ∆b ◦ ˆrc
i
nn
+
h
ˆrb, ˆ∆c ◦ ˆra
i
nn
−
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλab, ˆrc
i
nn
−
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλca, ˆrb
i
nn
−
h
ˆε ◦ ˆλbc, ˆra
i
nn
+ i
2
nh
ˆra,  ̃Ωcb,1
i
nn
+ (a ↔ b)
o
. (D53)
D.3.2. Expansion with respect to τ . In the transport regime,
where ω → 0, the quasiparticle lifetime τ becomes the only
parameter available for expansion. As discussed in the main
text, the most general case inevitably involves at least two dis-
tinct lifetimes: the interband lifetime τinter and the intraband
lifetime τintra. Let us define two corresponding relaxation rates:
Γ = τ −1
inter and γ = τ −1
intra. Taking the interband relaxation time as
the reference timescale τ = τinter, the intraband relaxation time
becomes τintra = α−1τ , with the undetermined ratio α = γ/Γ
distinguishing them. As discussed in the main text, the ratio
α = 2 implies that the quasiparticle lifetime in the conduction
band is much longer than in the valence band. In the transport
regime, this ensures charge conservation in the valence band
as now the localization effect dominates the relaxation process
in transports. In the following, we keep the α as a free para-
meter to discuss the most general case, and we will showα = 2
arises as a natural choice not only in the sense of guaranteeing
charge conservation but also in the sense of sharing consist-
ent results (including NLD, BCD, and QMD terms) with the
derivation from semiclassical formalism.
Inserting the proper lifetimes into the formula for the
second-order conductivity derived from Feynman diagram-
matics, yields,
σab;c
(2.A) (0; ω, −ω) = − e3
 ̄h2 (ω + i τ −1) (−ω + i τ −1)
X
n
ˆ
k
fn
uabc
nn
2 + (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) (D54)
σab;c
(2.B)+(2.C) (0; ω, −ω) = − e3
 ̄h2 (ω + i τ −1) (−ω + i τ −1)
X
nm
ˆ
k
fnmva
nmwcb
mn
ω + εnm + i τ −1 + (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) (D55)
σab;c
(2.D) (0; ω, −ω) = − e3
 ̄h2 (ω + i τ −1) (−ω + i τ −1)
X
nm
ˆ
k
1
2
fnmwab
nmvc
mn
−εmn + i ατ −1 + (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) (D56)
σab;c
(2.E)+(2.F) (0; ω, −ω) = − e3
 ̄h2 (ω + i τ −1) (−ω + i τ −1)
X
nml
ˆ
k
fnmva
nm
ω + εnm + i τ −1
 vb
mlvc
ln
−εln + i ατ −1 − vc
mlvb
ln
−εml + i ατ −1

+ (a, ω ↔ b, −ω) . (D57)
In these expressions, the interband/intraband lifetime have
been introduced according to whether ±ω (interband) or  ̄ω
(intraband) is present in the denominator. Note that the relax-
ation time is also included in the global coefficient − e3
 ̄h2ω1ω2
which is a consequence of the (quasi-) adiabatic perturbation
protocol with Ea(ω) = i ωAa(ω), which is also subject to the
relaxation time.
We note that compared to the expressions at first order, at
second order it is not possible to perform adiabatic switching
by simply replacing ω → iτ −1 because mixed terms appear not
34
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
only in the Green’s functions but also in the global frequency
denominator. Instead, the zero frequency limit ω → 0 should
be taken by expanding with respect to τ . Let us demonstrate
with a few examples.
Regarding (2.B) +(2.C), recall that f nm always excludes
terms where n = m, therefore the expansion can be performed
while assuming that |εnmτ | ≫ 1,
lim
ω→0
1
(ω + i τ −1) (−ω + i τ −1)
1
ω + εnm + i τ −1 = − τ 2
εnm
+ i τ
ε2nm
+ 1
ε3nm
− i τ −1
ε4nm
+ O

τ −2
(D58)
(2.D) becomes similarly,
lim
ω→0
1
(ω + i τ −1) (−ω + i τ −1)
1
−εmn + i ατ −1 = τ 2
εmn
+ i α τ
ε2mn
− α2 1
ε3mn
− i α3 τ −1
ε4mn
+ O

τ −2
. (D59)
However, regarding (2.E)+(2.F) we point out that for the denominator 1
−εln+i ατ −1 , it is possible to have both n ̸= l and n = l
cases, therefore it becomes necessary to discuss both cases separately when doing the expansion. In particular, in the n = l case
one obtains terms of size O(τ 3) for each diagram, which cancel each other in the final result.
D.3.3. Quantum metric dipole and in-gap nonlinear Hall response. Using the sum rules for the velocity vertices and with
the help of the lifetime expansion, one can recover the semiclassical NLD at order O(τ 2) and the BCD at order O(τ ) by
straightforward but tedious algebra. However, at order O(τ 0), the quantum perturbative result differs from the semiclassical
one by the presence of an additional Fermi sea term. For completeness, we state this observation using the language introduced
above.
It is possible to construct the band-normalized QMD in terms of the sum rule expressions,
∂cGab = ∂c
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAa, ˆAb
i
=
h
ˆε−2 ◦ ˆAb, ˆ∆c ◦ ˆAa
i
+
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAb, ˆSac
i
+ i
2
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAb,
h
ˆAa, ˆAc
ii
+
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAa, ˆSbc
i
+ i
2
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAa,
h
ˆAb, ˆAc
ii
. (D60)
From the semiclassical derivation, one expects this band-normalized QMD term, i.e. the nonlinear conductivity should con-
tain a piece β∂cGab
nn + γ∂aGbc
nn + (a ↔ b), where the coefficients β and γ are parameters which still need to be determined.
A lengthy calculation [ 92] then reveals that three Fermi sea terms are left over besides the QMD in the conductivity at
order τ 0,
σab;c
τ 0 = e3
 ̄h2
ˆ
k
X
n
fn

β∂cGab
nn + γ∂aGbc
nn + O

ε−2∆A2
+ O

ε−1SA

+ O

ε−1A3	
+ (a ↔ b) . (D61)
The three Fermi sea contributions to the intrinsic nonlinear response are purely quantum and do not appear in the semiclassical
derivation. Individually, they correspond to the contribution from the velocity shift, the positional shift, and the Berry curvature
renormalization during the nonlinear transport process, and read explicitly
O

ε−2∆A2
=
 1
α − 1 − β
h
ˆε−2 ◦ ˆAa, ˆ∆c ◦ ˆAb
i
+ (α − γ)
h
ˆε−2 ◦ ˆAc, ˆ∆a ◦ ˆAb
i
(D62)
O

ε−1SA

= (−2β − γ + 1)
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAa, ˆSbc
i
+

−γ + α2
2
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAc, ˆSab
i
(D63)
O

ε−1A3
=

−β − γ
2 + α
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAa, i
h
ˆAb, ˆAc
ii
+ i α

1 − α
2
h
ˆAa,
h
ˆAb, ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAc
ii
. (D64)
35
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
One can ask whether it is possible to eliminate all terms other
than the QMD term by choosing a certain combination of α,
β and γ so that all the coefficients becomes zero. However,
this is not possible. The second term in O(ε−1A3) enforces
α = 2, then the second term in O(ε−1SA) enforces γ = 2,
which further leads to β = − 1
2 to cancel the first term in
O(ε−1SA). Although this cancels all terms in O(ε−1SA)
and O(ε−2∆A2), yet we are still left with O(ε−1A3) =
3
2
h
ˆε−1 ◦ ˆAa, i
h
ˆAb, ˆAc
ii
̸= 0. Thus the diagrammatic deriva-
tion contains at least one more Fermi sea contribution that is
missed in the semiclassical derivation.
Although different values have been reported for β and
γ [51, 62, 64, 65, 150], there is an emerging agreement that
the intrinsic nonlinear transport conductivity should contain
both a longitudinal and transverse QMD.
References
[1] Törmä P 2023 Essay: where can quantum geometry lead us?
Phys. Rev. Lett. 131 240001
[2] Y u J, Bernevig B A, Queiroz R, Rossi E, Törmä P and
Y ang B-J 2024 Quantum geometry in quantum materials
(arXiv:2501.00098 [cond-mat.mes-hall])
[3] Resta R and V anderbilt D 2007 Theory of polarization: a
modern approach Physics of Ferroelectrics: A Modern
Perspective (Springer) pp 31–68 http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-34591-6_2
[4] The self-rotation can alternatively be expressed as the
non-commutativity of the position operator in the ground
state manifold [163]
[5] Hasan M Z and Kane C L 2010 Colloquium: topological
insulators Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 3045–67
[6] Qi X-L and Zhang S-C 2011 Topological insulators and
superconductors Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 1057–110
[7] Hasan M Z and Moore J E 2011 Three-dimensional
topological insulators Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys.
2 55–78
[8] Y an B and Felser C 2017 Topological materials: Weyl
semimetals Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys.
8 337–54
[9] Armitage N P , Mele E J and Vishwanath A 2018 Weyl and
Dirac semimetals in three-dimensional solids Rev. Mod.
Phys. 90 015001
[10] V anderbilt D 2018Berry Phases in Electronic Structure
Theory: Electric Polarization, Orbital Magnetization and
Topological Insulators (Cambridge University Press)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/9781316662205
[11] Provost J P and V allee G 1980 Riemannian structure on
manifolds of quantum states Commun. Math. Phys.
76 289–301
[12] Avdoshkin A and Popov F K 2023 Extrinsic geometry of
quantum states Phys. Rev. B 107 245136
[13] Ma Q, Grushin A G and Burch K S 2021 Topology and
geometry under the nonlinear electromagnetic spotlight
Nat. Mater .20 1601–14
[14] Sipe J E and Shkrebtii A I 2000 Second-order optical
response in semiconductors Phys. Rev. B 61 5337–52
[15] Holder T, Kaplan D and Y an B 2020 Consequences of
time-reversal-symmetry breaking in the light-matter
interaction: Berry curvature, quantum metric and diabatic
motion Phys. Rev. Res. 2 033100
[16] Hosur P 2011 Phys. Rev. B 83 035309
[17] Chang G et al 2017 Unconventional chiral fermions and large
topological fermi arcs in RhSi Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 206401
[18] Golub L E, Ivchenko E Â L and Spivak B 2020 Semiclassical
theory of the circular photogalvanic effect in gyrotropic
systems Phys. Rev. B 102 085202
[19] de Juan F, Grushin A G, Morimoto T and Moore J E 2017
Quantized circular photogalvanic effect in Weyl
semimetals Nat. Commun. 8 15995
[20] Avdoshkin A, Kozii V and Moore J E 2020 Interactions
remove the quantization of the chiral photocurrent at Weyl
points Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 196603
[21] Ma Q et al 2017 Direct optical detection of Weyl fermion
chirality in a topological semimetal Nat. Phys. 13 842–7
[22] Rees D, Manna K, Lu B, Morimoto T, Borrmann H, Felser C,
Moore J E, Torchinsky D H and Orenstein J 2020
Helicity-dependent photocurrents in the chiral Weyl
semimetal RhSi Sci. Adv. 6 eaba0509
[23] Ni Z et al 2021 Giant topological longitudinal circular
photo-galvanic effect in the chiral multifold semimetal
cosi Nat. Commun. 12 154
[24] Wu L, Patankar S, Morimoto T, Nair N L, Thewalt E,
Little A, Analytis J G, Moore J E and Orenstein J 2017
Giant anisotropic nonlinear optical response in transition
metal monopnictide Weyl semimetals Nat. Phys. 13 350–5
[25] Osterhoudt G B et al 2019 Colossal mid-infrared bulk
photovoltaic effect in a type-I Weyl semimetal Nat. Mater .
18 471–5
[26] Fei R, Song W and Y ang Li 2020 Giant photogalvanic effect
and second-harmonic generation in magnetic axion
insulators Phys. Rev. B 102 035440
[27] Chan C-K, Lee P A, Burch K S, Han J H and Ran Y 2016
When chiral photons meet chiral fermions: photoinduced
anomalous Hall effects in Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev.
Lett. 116 026805
[28] Chan C-K, Lindner N H, Refael G and Lee P A 2017
Photocurrents in Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev. B 95 041104
[29] Rangel T, Fregoso B M, Mendoza B S, Morimoto T,
Moore J E and Neaton J B 2017 Large bulk photovoltaic
effect and spontaneous polarization of single-layer
monochalcogenides Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 067402
[30] König E J, Xie H Y , Pesin D A and Levchenko A 2017
Photogalvanic effect in Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev. B
96 075123
[31] Zhang Y , Ishizuka H, van den Brink J, Felser C, Y an B and
Nagaosa N 2018a Photogalvanic effect in Weyl
semimetals from first principles Phys. Rev. B 97 241118
[32] Golub L E and Ivchenko E L 2018 Circular and
magnetoinduced photocurrents in Weyl semimetals Phys.
Rev. B 98 075305
[33] Raj A, Chaudhary S and Fiete G A 2024 Photogalvanic
response in multi-Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev. Res.
6 013048
[34] Tan L Z and Rappe A M 2016 Enhancement of the bulk
photovoltaic effect in topological insulators Phys. Rev.
Lett. 116 237402
[35] Fregoso B M, Morimoto T and Moore J E 2017 Quantitative
relationship between polarization differences and the
zone-averaged shift photocurrent Phys. Rev. B 96 075421
[36] Cook A M, Fregoso B M, de Juan F, Coh S and Moore J E
2017 Design principles for shift current photovoltaics Nat.
Commun. 8 14176
[37] Parker D E, Morimoto T, Orenstein J and Moore J E 2019
Diagrammatic approach to nonlinear optical response with
application to Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev. B 99 045121
[38] Kaplan D, Holder T and Y an B 2022 Twisted photovoltaics at
terahertz frequencies from momentum shift current Phys.
Rev. Res. 4 013209
[39] Chaudhary S, Lewandowski C and Refael G 2022
Shift-current response as a probe of quantum geometry
and electron-electron interactions in twisted bilayer
graphene Phys. Rev. Res. 4 013164
36
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
[40] Watanabe H and Y anase Y 2021 Photocurrent response in
parity-time symmetric current-ordered states Phys. Rev. B
104 024416
[41] Watanabe H, Daido A and Y anase Y 2022 Nonreciprocal
optical response in parity-breaking superconductors Phys.
Rev. B 105 024308
[42] Avdoshkin A, Mitscherling J and Moore J E 2024 The
multi-state geometry of shift current and polarization
(arXiv:2409.16358)
[43] Alexandradinata A 2024 Quantization of intraband and
interband Berry phases in the shift current Phys. Rev. B
110 075159
[44] Zhang Y , Holder T, Ishizuka H, de Juan F, Nagaosa N,
Felser C and Y an B 2019 Switchable magnetic bulk
photovoltaic effect in the two-dimensional magnet CrI 3
Nat. Commun. 10 3783
[45] Watanabe H and Y anase Y 2021b Chiral photocurrent in
parity-violating magnet and enhanced response in
topological antiferromagnet Phys. Rev. X 11 011001
[46] Kaplan D, Holder T and Y an B 2020 Nonvanishing subgap
photocurrent as a probe of lifetime effects Phys. Rev. Lett.
125 227401
[47] Michishita Y and Peters R 2021 Effects of renormalization
and non-Hermiticity on nonlinear responses in strongly
correlated electron systems Phys. Rev. B 103 195133
[48] Matsyshyn O, Song J C W, Villadiego I S and Shi Li-kun
2023 Fermi-Dirac staircase occupation of Floquet bands
and current rectification inside the optical gap of metals:
an exact approach Phys. Rev. B 107 195135
[49] Kaplan D, Holder T and Y an B 2023 Unifying semiclassics
and quantum perturbation theory at nonlinear order
SciPost Phys. 14 082
[50] Sodemann I and Fu L 2015 Quantum nonlinear Hall effect
induced by berry curvature dipole in time-reversal
invariant materials Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 216806
[51] Gao Y 2019 Semiclassical dynamics and nonlinear charge
current Front. Phys. 14 33404
[52] Watanabe H and Y anase Y 2020 Nonlinear electric transport
in odd-parity magnetic multipole systems: application to
Mn-based compounds Phys. Rev. Res. 2 043081
[53] Wang C, Gao Y and Xiao D 2021 Intrinsic nonlinear Hall
effect in antiferromagnetic tetragonal CuMnAs Phys. Rev.
Lett. 127 277201
[54] Zhang Y , Sun Y and Y an B 2018 Berry curvature dipole in
Weyl semimetal materials: an ab initio study Phys. Rev. B
97 041101
[55] Matsyshyn O and Sodemann I 2019 Nonlinear Hall
acceleration and the quantum rectification sum rule Phys.
Rev. Lett. 123 246602
[56] Nandy S and Sodemann I 2019 Symmetry and quantum
kinetics of the nonlinear Hall effect Phys. Rev. B
100 195117
[57] Xu S-Y 2018 Electrically switchable Berry curvature dipole
in the monolayer topological insulator WTe 2 Nat. Phys.
14 900–6
[58] Ma Q 2019 Observation of the nonlinear Hall effect
under time-reversal-symmetric conditions Nature
565 337–42
[59] Kang K, Li T, Sohn E, Shan J and Mak K F 2019 Nonlinear
anomalous Hall effect in few-layer WTe 2 Nat. Mater .
18 324–8
[60] Jiang Y , Yi Q and Y an B 2024 Electrical magnetochiral
anisotropy and quantum metric in chiral conductors 2D
Mater .12 015020
[61] Zhao Y , Jiang Y and Bae H and Das K, Li Y , Liu C-X and
Y an B 2024 Hybrid-order topology in unconventional
magnets of Eu-based Zintl compounds with
surface-dependent quantum geometry Phys. Rev. B
110 205111
[62] Gao Y , Y ang S A and Niu Q 2014 Field induced positional
shift of bloch electrons and its dynamical implications
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 166601
[63] Liu H, Zhao J, Huang Y -X, Wu W, Sheng X-L, Xiao C and
Y ang S A 2021 Intrinsic second-order anomalous Hall
effect and its application in compensated antiferromagnets
Phys. Rev. Lett. 127 277202
[64] Kaplan D, Holder T and Y an B 2024 Unification of nonlinear
anomalous Hall effect and nonreciprocal
magnetoresistance in metals by the quantum geometry
Phys. Rev. Lett. 132 026301
[65] Das K, Lahiri S, Atencia R B, Culcer D and Agarwal A 2023
Intrinsic nonlinear conductivities induced by the quantum
metric Phys. Rev. B 108 L201405
[66] Wang N 2023 Quantum-metric-induced nonlinear transport
in a topological antiferromagnet Nature 621 487–92
[67] Gao A et al 2023 Quantum metric nonlinear Hall effect in a
topological antiferromagnetic heterostructure Science
381 181–6
[68] Boyd R W 2003 Nonlinear Optics (Elsevier)
[69] Sturman B and Fridkin V 2021 Photovoltaic and
Photo-Refractive Effects in Noncentrosymmetric Materials
(Routledge)
[70] Morimoto T and Nagaosa N 2016 Topological nature of
nonlinear optical effects in solids Sci. Adv. 2 e1501524
[71] Tokura Y and Nagaosa N 2018 Nonreciprocal responses from
non-centrosymmetric quantum materials Nat. Commun.
9 3740
[72] Du Z Z, Lu H-Z and Xie X C 2021 Nonlinear Hall effects
Nat. Rev. Phys. 3 744–52
[73] Morimoto T, Kitamura S and Nagaosa N 2023 Geometric
aspects of nonlinear and nonequilibrium phenomena J.
Phys. Soc. Japan 92 072001
[74] Nagaosa N 2022 Nonlinear optical responses in
noncentrosymmetric quantum materials Ann. Phys., NY
447 169146
[75] Dai Z and Rappe A M 2023 Recent progress in the theory of
bulk photovoltaic effect Chem. Phys. Rev. 4 011303
[76] Liu T, Qiang X-B, Lu H-Z and Xie X C 2024 Quantum
geometry in condensed matter Natl. Sci. Rev. 12 nwae334
[77] Belinicher V I and Sturman B I 1980 The photogalvanic
effect in media lacking a center of symmetry Sov. Phys.
Usp. 23 199–223
[78] von Baltz R and Kraut W 1981 Theory of the bulk
photovoltaic effect in pure crystals Phys. Rev. B 23 5590–6
[79] Kraut W and von Baltz R 1979 Anomalous bulk photovoltaic
effect in ferroelectrics: a quadratic response theory Phys.
Rev. B 19 1548–54
[80] Aversa C and Sipe J E 1995 Nonlinear optical susceptibilities
of semiconductors: Results with a length-gauge analysis
Phys. Rev. B 52 14636–45
[81] Sun Z et al 2019 Giant nonreciprocal second-harmonic
generation from antiferromagnetic bilayer CrI 3 Nature
572 497–501
[82] Ma J, Gu Q, Liu Y , Lai J, Y u P , Zhuo X, Liu Z, Chen J-H,
Feng J and Sun D 2019 Nonlinear photoresponse of
type-II Weyl semimetals Nat. Mater .18 476–81
[83] Jankowski W J and Slager R-J 2024 Quantized integrated
shift effect in multigap topological phases Phys. Rev. Lett.
133 186601
[84] Ahn J, Guo G-Y and Nagaosa N 2020 Low-frequency
divergence and quantum geometry of the bulk photovoltaic
effect in topological semimetals Phys. Rev. X 10 041041
[85] Ahn J, Guo G-Y , Nagaosa N and Vishwanath A 2022
Riemannian geometry of resonant optical responses Nat.
Phys. 18 290–5
[86] Iba nez-Azpiroz J, Tsirkin S S and Souza I 2018 Ab initio
calculation of the shift photocurrent by Wannier
interpolation Phys. Rev. B 97 245143
37
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
[87] Zhu P and Alexandradinata A 2024 Anomalous shift and
optical vorticity in the steady photovoltaic current Phys.
Rev. B 110 115108
[88] Sundaram G and Niu Q 1999 Wave-packet dynamics in
slowly perturbed crystals: gradient corrections and
Berry-phase effects Phys. Rev. B 59 14915–25
[89] Culcer D, Y ao Y and Niu Q 2005 Coherent wave-packet
evolution in coupled bands Phys. Rev. B 72 085110
[90] Chang M-C and Niu Q 2008 TOPICAL REVIEW: Berry
curvature, orbital moment and effective quantum theory of
electrons in electromagnetic fields J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter .20 193202
[91] Bhalla P , Das K, Agarwal A and Culcer D 2023 Quantum
kinetic theory of nonlinear optical currents: Finite Fermi
surface and Fermi sea contributions Phys. Rev. B
107 165131
[92] Kaplan D, Holder T and Y an B 2023 General nonlinear Hall
current in magnetic insulators beyond the quantum
anomalous Hall effect Nat. Commun. 14 3053
[93] Deyo E, Golub L E, Ivchenko E L and Spivak B 2009
Semiclassical theory of the photogalvanic effect in
non-centrosymmetric systems (arXiv:0904.1917)
[94] Sturman B I and Fridkin V M 1992 The Photovoltaic and
Photorefractive Effects in Noncentrosymmetric Materials
(Gordon and Breach Philadelphia)
[95] Mikhailov S A 2014 Quantum theory of third-harmonic
generation in graphene Phys. Rev. B 90 241301
[96] Mikhailov S A 2016 Quantum theory of the third-order
nonlinear electrodynamic effects of graphene Phys. Rev. B
93 085403
[97] Cheng J L, V ermeulen N and Sipe J E 2014 Third order
optical nonlinearity of graphene New J. Phys. 16 053014
[98] Cheng J L, V ermeulen N and Sipe J E 2015 Third-order
nonlinearity of graphene: effects of phenomenological
relaxation and finite temperature Phys. Rev. B 91 235320
[99] Cheng J L, V ermeulen N and Sipe J E 2017 Second order
optical nonlinearity of graphene due to electric quadrupole
and magnetic dipole effects Sci. Rep. 7 43843
[100] V entura G B, Passos D J, Lopes dos Santos J M B, Viana
Parente Lopes J M and Peres N M R 2017 Gauge
covariances and nonlinear optical responses Phys. Rev. B
96 035431
[101] Passos D J, V entura G B, Lopes J M V P , Santos J M B L dos
and Peres N M R 2018 Nonlinear optical responses of
crystalline systems: results from a velocity gauge analysis
Phys. Rev. B 97 235446
[102] Zhang Z-fan, Zhu Z-G and Su G 2023 Symmetry dictionary
on charge and spin nonlinear responses for all magnetic
point groups with nontrivial topological nature Natl Sci.
Rev. 10 nwad104
[103] Holder T, Kaplan D, Ilan R and Y an B 2021 Mixed
axial-gravitational anomaly from emergent curved
spacetime in nonlinear charge transport
(arXiv:2111.07780)
[104] Kim K W, Morimoto T and Nagaosa N 2017 Shift charge and
spin photocurrents in Dirac surface states of topological
insulator Phys. Rev. B 95 035134
[105] Chang G et al 2020 Unconventional photocurrents from
surface fermi arcs in topological chiral semimetals Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124 166404
[106] Steiner J F, Andreev A V and Breitkreiz M 2022 Surface
photogalvanic effect in Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev. Res.
4 023021
[107] Du Z Z, Wang C M, Lu H-Z and Xie X C 2018 Band
signatures for strong nonlinear Hall effect in bilayer WTe 2
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 266601
[108] Tiwari A et al 2021 Giant c-axis nonlinear anomalous Hall
effect in T d-MoTe2 and WTe2 Nat. Commun. 12 2049
[109] Min L et al 2023 Strong room-temperature bulk nonlinear
Hall effect in a spin-valley locked Dirac material Nat.
Commun. 14 364
[110] Kumar D, Hsu C-H, Sharma R, Chang T-R, Y u P , Wang J,
Eda G, Liang G and Y ang H 2021 Room-temperature
nonlinear Hall effect and wireless radiofrequency
rectification in Weyl semimetal TaIrTe4 Nat. Nanotechnol.
16 421–5
[111] Duan J, Jian Y , Gao Y , Peng H, Zhong J, Feng Q, Mao J
and Y ao Y 2022 Giant second-order nonlinear Hall
effect in twisted bilayer graphene Phys. Rev. Lett.
129 186801
[112] He P , Koon G K W, Isobe H, Tan J Y , Hu J, Neto A H C, Fu L
and Y ang H 2022 Graphene moiré superlattices with giant
quantum nonlinearity of chiral bloch electrons Nat.
Nanotechnol. 17 378–83
[113] Huang M et al 2022 Giant nonlinear Hall effect in twisted
WSe2 Natl. Sci. Rev. 10 nwac232
[114] He Z and Weng H 2021 Giant nonlinear Hall effect in twisted
bilayer WTe2 npj Quantum Mater .6 101
[115] He P , Isobe H, Zhu D, Hsu C-H, Fu L and Y ang H 2021
Quantum frequency doubling in the topological insulator
Bi2Se3 Nat. Commun. 12 698
[116] Isobe H, Xu S-Y and Fu L 2020 High-frequency rectification
via chiral Bloch electrons Sci. Adv. 6 eaay2497
[117] Sturman B 2019 Ballistic and shift currents in the bulk
photovoltaic effect theory Phys. Usp. 63 4
[118] Nagaosa N, Sinova J, Onoda S, MacDonald A H and
Ong N P 2010 Anomalous Hall effect Rev. Mod. Phys.
82 1539–92
[119] Xiao C, Du Z Z and Niu Q 2019 Theory of nonlinear Hall
effects: modified semiclassics from quantum kinetics
Phys. Rev. B 100 165422
[120] Papaj M and Fu L 2019 Magnus Hall effect Phys. Rev. Lett.
123 216802
[121] Du Z Z, Wang C M, Li S, Lu H-Z and Xie X C 2019
Disorder-induced nonlinear Hall effect with time-reversal
symmetry Nat. Commun. 10 3047
[122] König E J and Levchenko A 2021 Quantum kinetics of
anomalous and nonlinear Hall effects in topological
semimetals Ann. Phys., NY 435 168492
[123] Du Z Z, Wang C M, Sun H-P , Lu H-Z and Xie X C 2021
Quantum theory of the nonlinear Hall effect Nat.
Commun. 12 5038
[124] Atencia R B, Niu Q and Culcer D 2022 Semiclassical
response of disordered conductors: extrinsic carrier
velocity and spin and field-corrected collision integral
Phys. Rev. Res. 4 013001
[125] Bouhon A, Timmel A and Slager R-J 2023 Quantum
geometry beyond projective single bands arXiv Preprint
(arXiv:2303.02180)
[126] Kolodrubetz M, Sels D, Mehta P and Polkovnikov A 2017
Geometry and non-adiabatic response in quantum and
classical systems Phys. Rep. 697 1–87
[127] Mera B and Mitscherling J 2022 Nontrivial quantum
geometry of degenerate flat bands Phys. Rev. B
106 165133
[128] Mitscherling J, Avdoshkin A and Moore J E 2024
Gauge-invariant projector calculus for quantum state
geometry and applications to observables in crystals
(arXiv:2412.03637)
[129] de Juan F, Zhang Y , Morimoto T, Sun Y , Moore J E and
Grushin A G 2020 Difference frequency generation
in topological semimetals Phys. Rev. Res.
2 012017
[130] Xiang L, Zhang C, Wang L and Wang J 2023 Third-order
intrinsic anomalous Hall effect with generalized
semiclassical theory Phys. Rev. B 107 075411
38
Rep. Prog. Phys. 88 (2025) 076502 Review
[131] Jankowski W J, Morris A S, Bouhon A,  ́Unal F N and
Slager R-J 2025 Optical manifestations and
bounds of topological Euler class Phys. Rev. B
111 L081103
[132] Fregoso B M 2019 Bulk photovoltaic effects in the presence
of a static electric field Phys. Rev. B 100 064301
[133] Liu H, Zhao J, Huang Y -X, Feng X, Xiao C, Wu W, Lai S,
Gao W-bo and Y ang S A 2022 Berry connection
polarizability tensor and third-order Hall effect Phys. Rev.
B 105 045118
[134] Fang Y , Cano J and Ghorashi S A A 2024 Quantum geometry
induced nonlinear transport in altermagnets Phys. Rev.
Lett. 133 106701
[135] Xiao D, Chang M-C and Niu Q 2010 Berry phase effects on
electronic properties Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 1959–2007
[136] Gong S-J, Zheng F and Rappe A M 2018 Phonon influence
on bulk photovoltaic effect in the ferroelectric
semiconductor GeTe Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 017402
[137] Dai Z, Schankler A M, Gao L, Tan L Z and Rappe A M 2021
Phonon-assisted ballistic current from first-principles
calculations Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 177403
[138] Xu H, Wang H and Li J 2022 Nonlinear nonreciprocal
photocurrents under phonon dressing Phys. Rev. B
106 035102
[139] Dai Z and Rappe A M 2023 Magnetic bulk photovoltaic
effect: strong and weak field Phys. Rev. B
107 L201201
[140] Burger A M, Agarwal R, Aprelev A, Schruba E,
Gutierrez-Perez A, Fridkin V M and Spanier J E 2019
Direct observation of shift and ballistic photovoltaic
currents Sci. Adv. 5 eaau5588
[141] Fei R, Tan L Z and Rappe A M 2020 Shift-current bulk
photovoltaic effect influenced by quasiparticle and exciton
Phys. Rev. B 101 045104
[142] Chang Y -T and Chan Y -H 2024 Diagrammatic approach to
excitonic effects on nonlinear optical response Phys. Rev.
B 109 155437
[143] Nakamura M et al 2024 Strongly enhanced shift current at
exciton resonances in a noncentrosymmetric wide-gap
semiconductor Nat. Commun. 15 9672
[144] Bhalla P , MacDonald A H and Culcer D 2020 Resonant
photovoltaic effect in doped magnetic semiconductors
Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 087402
[145] König E J, Dzero M, Levchenko A and Pesin D A 2019
Gyrotropic Hall effect in Berry-curved materials Phys.
Rev. B 99 155404
[146] Belinicher V , Ivchenko E and Pikus G 1986 Transient
photocurrent in gyrotropic crystals Sov. Phys. Semicond.
20 558
[147] Onishi Y , Watanabe H, Morimoto T and Nagaosa N 2022
Effects of relaxation on the photovoltaic effect and
possibility for photocurrent within the transparent region
Phys. Rev. B 106 235110
[148] Golub L E and Glazov M M 2022 Raman photogalvanic
effect: photocurrent at inelastic light scattering Phys. Rev.
B 106 205205
[149] Shi Li-kun, Matsyshyn O, Song J C W and Villadiego I S
2023 Berry-dipole photovoltaic demon and the
thermodynamics of photocurrent generation
within the optical gap of metals Phys. Rev. B
107 125151
[150] Jia J, Xiang L, Qiao Z and Wang J 2024 Equivalence of
semiclassical and response theories for
second-order nonlinear ac Hall effects Phys. Rev. B
110 245406
[151] Oiwa R and Kusunose H 2022 Systematic analysis method
for nonlinear response tensors J. Phys. Soc. Japan
91 014701
[152] Holder T 2021 Electrons flow like falling cats: deformations
and emergent gravity in quantum transport
(arXiv:2111.07782)
[153] Son D T and Spivak B Z 2013 Chiral anomaly and classical
negative magnetoresistance of Weyl metals Phys. Rev. B
88 104412
[154] Ilan R, Grushin A G and Pikulin D I 2020
Pseudo-electromagnetic fields in 3D topological
semimetals Nat. Rev. Phys. 2 29–41
[155] Landsteiner K 2016 Notes on anomaly induced transport
Acta Phys. Pol. B 47 2617
[156] Gooth J et al 2017 Experimental signatures of the mixed
axial-gravitational anomaly in the Weyl semimetal NbP
Nature 547 324–7
[157] Chernodub M N, Ferreiros Y , Grushin A G, Landsteiner K
and V ozmediano M A H 2022 Thermal transport,
geometry and anomalies Phys. Rep. 977 1–58
[158] Y u R, Zhang W, Zhang H-J, Zhang S-C, Dai Xi and Fang Z
2010 Quantized anomalous Hall Effect in magnetic
topological insulators Science 329 61
[159] Gao Y , Zhang F and Zhang W 2020 Second-order nonlinear
Hall effect in Weyl semimetals Phys. Rev. B 102 245116
[160] Mehraeen M 2024 Quantum kinetic theory of quadratic
responses Phys. Rev. B 110 174423
[161] Sinitsyn N A, Niu Q and MacDonald A H 2006 Coordinate
shift in the semiclassical Boltzmann
equation and the anomalous Hall effect Phys. Rev. B
73 075318
[162] Xiang L and Wang J 2024 Intrinsic in-plane
magnetononlinear Hall effect in tilted Weyl semimetals
Phys. Rev. B 109 075419
[163] Haldane F D 2004 Berry curvature on the fermi surface:
anomalous hall effect as a topological fermi-liquid
property Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 206602
39