THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX

HOWARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Abstract. We give a distance estimate for the metric on the disk

complex and show that it is Gromov hyperbolic. As another appli-

cation of our techniques, we ﬁnd an algorithm which computes the

Hempel distance of a Heegaard splitting, up to an error depending

only on the genus.

Contents

1. Introduction 2

2. Background on complexes 4

3. Background on coarse geometry 7

4. Natural maps 10

5. Holes in general and the lower bound on distance 13

6. Holes for the non-orientable surface 16

7. Holes for the arc complex 17

8. Background on three-manifolds 18

9. Holes for the disk complex 20

10. Holes for the disk complex – annuli 22

11. Holes for the disk complex – compressible 24

12. Holes for the disk complex – incompressible 27

13. Axioms for combinatorial complexes 34

14. Partition and the upper bound on distance 38

15. Background on Teichm¨ uller space 49

16. Paths for the non-orientable surface 53

17. Paths for the arc complex 57

18. Background on train tracks 58

19. Paths for the disk complex 60

20. Hyperbolicity 62

21. Coarsely computing Hempel distance 67

References 71

Date: October 22, 2018.

This work is in the public domain.

arXiv:1010.3174v1  [math.GT]  15 Oct 2010

2 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

1. Introduction

In this paper we initiate the study of the geometry of the disk complex

of a handlebody V . The disk complex D(V ) has a natural simplicial

inclusion into the curve complex C(S) of the boundary of the handlebody.

Surprisingly, this inclusion is not a quasi-isometric embedding; there are

disks which are close in the curve complex yet very far apart in the disk

complex. As we will show, any obstruction to joining such disks via a

short path is a topologically meaningful subsurface of S =∂V . We call

such subsurfaces holes. A path in the disk complex must travel into

and then out of these holes; paths in the curve complex may skip over

a hole by using the vertex representing the boundary of the subsurface.

We classify the holes:

Theorem 1.1. Suppose V is a handlebody. If X⊂ ∂V is a hole for

the disk complex D(V ) of diameter at least 61 then:

• X is not an annulus.

• If X is compressible then there are disks D,E with boundary

contained in X so that the boundaries ﬁll X.

• If X is incompressible then there is an I-bundle ρF : T→F so

that T is a component of V ∖∂vT and X is a component of ∂hT .

See Theorems 10.1, 11.6 and 12.1 for more precise statements. The I–

bundles appearing in the classiﬁcation lead us to study the arc complex

A(F ) of the base surface F . Since the I–bundle T may be twisted the

surface F may be non-orientable.

Thus, as a necessary warm-up to the diﬃcult case of the disk complex,

we also analyze the holes for the curve complex of an non-orientable

surface, as well as the holes for the arc complex.

Topological application. It is a long-standing open problem to de-

cide, given a Heegaard diagram, whether the underlying splitting sur-

face is reducible. This question has deep connections to the geometry,

topology, and algebra of the ambient three-manifold. For example, a

resolution of this problem would give new solutions to both the three-

sphere recognition problem and the triviality problem for three-manifold

groups. The diﬃculty of deciding reducibility is underlined by its con-

nection to the Poincar´ e conjecture: several approaches to the Poincar´ e

Conjecture fell at essentially this point. See [ 10] for a entrance into the

literature.

One generalization of deciding reducibility is to ﬁnd an algorithm

that, given a Heegaard diagram, computes the distance of the Heegaard

splitting as deﬁned by Hempel [ 20]. (For example, see [ 5, Section 2].)

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 3

The classiﬁcation of holes for the disk complex leads to a coarse answer

to this question.

Theorem 21.1. In every genus g there is a constant K =K(g) and

an algorithm that, given a Heegaard diagram, computes the distance of

the Heegaard splitting with error at most K.

In addition to the classiﬁcation of holes, the algorithm relies on the

Gromov hyperbolicity of the curve complex [24] and the quasi-convexity

of the disk set inside of the curve complex [ 26]. However the algorithm

does not depend on our geometric applications of Theorem 1.1.

Geometric application. The hyperbolicity of the curve complex and

the classiﬁcation of holes allows us to prove:

Theorem 20.3. The disk complex is Gromov hyperbolic.

Again, as a warm-up to the proof of Theorem 20.3 we prove that

C(F ) and A(S) are hyperbolic in Corollary 6.4 and Theorem 20.2. Note

that Bestvina and Fujiwara [ 4] have previously dealt with the curve

complex of a non-orientable surface, following Bowditch [6].

These results cannot be deduced from the fact that D(V ),C(F ), and

A(S) can be realized as quasi-convex subsets of C(S). This is because

the curve complex is locally inﬁnite. As simple example consider the

Cayley graph of Z2 with the standard generating set. Then the cone

C(Z2) of height one-half is a Gromov hyperbolic space and Z2 is a

quasi-convex subset. Another instructive example, very much in-line

with our work, is the usual embedding of the three-valent tree T3 into

the Farey tessellation.

The proof of Theorem 20.3 requires the distance estimate Theo-

rem 19.1: the distance in C(F ),A(S), and D(V ) is coarsely equal

to the sum of subsurface projection distances in holes. However, we

do not use the hierarchy machine introduced in [ 25]. This is because

hierarchies are too ﬂexible to respect a symmetry, such as the involution

giving a non-orientable surface, and at the same time too rigid for the

disk complex. For C(F ) we use the highly rigid Teichm¨ uller geodesic

machine, due to Raﬁ [ 33]. For D(V ) we use the extremely ﬂexible train

track machine, developed by ourselves and Mosher [27].

Theorems 19.1 and 20.3 are part of a more general framework. Namely,

given a combinatorial complex G we understand its geometry by clas-

sifying the holes: the geometric obstructions lying between G and the

curve complex. In Sections 13 and 14 we show that any complex G

satisfying certain axioms necessarily satisﬁes a distance estimate. That

hyperbolicity follows from the axioms is proven in Section 20.

4 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Our axioms are stated in terms of a path of markings, a path in the

the combinatorial complex, and their relationship. For the disk complex

the combinatorial paths are surgery sequences of essential disks while

the marking paths are provided by train track splitting sequences; both

constructions are due to the ﬁrst author and Minsky [26] (Section 18).

The veriﬁcation of the axioms (Section 19) relies on our work with

Mosher, analyzing train track splitting sequences in terms of subsurface

projections [27].

We do not study non-orientable surfaces directly; instead we focus on

symmetric multicurves in the double cover. This time marking paths are

provided by Teichm¨ uller geodesics, using the fact that the symmetric

Riemann surfaces form a totally geodesic subset of Teichm¨ uller space.

The combinatorial path is given by the systole map. We use results

of Raﬁ [33] to verify the axioms for the complex of symmetric curves.

(See Section 16.) Section 17 veriﬁes the axioms for the arc complex

again using Teichm¨ uller geodesics and the systole map. It is interesting

to note that the axioms for the arc complex can also be veriﬁed using

hierarchies or, indeed, train track splitting sequences.

The distance estimates for the marking graph and the pants graph,

as given by the ﬁrst author and Minsky [ 25], inspired the work here,

but do not ﬁt our framework. Indeed, neither the marking graph nor

the pants graph are Gromov hyperbolic. It is crucial here that all holes

interfere; this leads to hyperbolicity. When there are non-interfering

holes, it is unclear how to partition the marking path to obtain the

distance estimate.

Acknowledgments. We thank Jason Behrstock, Brian Bowditch, Yair

Minsky, Lee Mosher, Hossein Namazi, and Kasra Raﬁ for many enlight-

ening conversations.

We thank Tao Li for pointing out that our original bound inside of

Theorem 12.1 of O(logg(V )) could be reduced to a constant.

2. Background on complexes

We useSg,b,c to denote the compact connected surface of genus g with

b boundary components and c cross-caps. If the surface is orientable

we omit the subscript c and write Sg,b. The complexity of S =Sg,b is

ξ(S) = 3g− 3 +b. If the surface is closed and orientable we simply

write Sg.

2.1. Arcs and curves. A simple closed curve α⊂ S is essential if

α does not bound a disk in S. The curve α is non-peripheral if α is

not isotopic to a component of ∂S. A simple arc β⊂ S is proper if

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 5

β∩∂S =∂β. An isotopy of S is proper if it preserves the boundary

setwise. A proper arc β⊂ S is essential if β is not properly isotopic

into a regular neighborhood of ∂S.

Deﬁne C(S) to be the set of isotopy classes of essential, non-peripheral

curves in S. Deﬁne A(S) to be the set of proper isotopy classes of

essential arcs. When S =S0,2 is an annulus deﬁne A(S) to be the set

of essential arcs, up to isotopies ﬁxing the boundary pointwise. For any

surface deﬁneAC(S) =A(S)∪C (S).

For α,β ∈AC (S) the geometric intersection number ι(α,β ) is the

minimum intersection possible between α and any β′ equivalent to β.

When S = S0,2 we do not count intersection points occurring on the

boundary. If α and β realize their geometric intersection number then

α is tight with respect to β. If they do not realize their geometric

intersection then we may tighten β until they do.

Deﬁne ∆⊂AC (S) to be a multicurve if for all α,β ∈ ∆ we have

ι(α,β ) = 0. Following Harvey [ 18] we may impose the structure of a

simplical complex onAC(S): the simplices are exactly the multicurves.

Also,C(S) and A(S) naturally span sub-complexes.

Note that the curve complexes C(S1,1) and C(S0,4) have no edges. It

is useful to alter the deﬁnition in these cases. Place edges between all

vertices with geometric intersection exactly one if S = S1,1 or two if

S =S0,4. In both cases the result is the Farey graph. Also, with the

current deﬁnition C(S) is empty if S =S0,2. Thus for the annulus only

we setAC(S) =C(S) =A(S).

Deﬁnition 2.1. For vertices α,β ∈C (S) deﬁne the distanced S(α,β ) to

be the minimum possible number of edges of a path in the one-skeleton

C1(S) which starts at α and ends at β.

Note that if dS(α,β )≥ 3 then α and β ﬁll the surface S. We denote

distance in the one-skeleton of A(S) and of AC(S) by dA and dAC

respectively. Recall that the geometric intersection of a pair of curves

gives an upper bound for their distance.

Lemma 2.2. Suppose that S is a compact connected surface which

is not an annulus. For any α,β ∈C 0(S) with ι(α,β ) > 0 we have

dS(α,β )≤ 2 log2(ι(α,β )) + 2. □

This form of the inequality, stated for closed orientable surfaces, may

be found in [ 20]. A proof in the bounded orientable case is given in [ 36].

The non-orientable case is then an exercise. When S =S0,2 an induction

proves

(2.3) dX(α,β ) = 1 +ι(α,β )

for distinct vertices α,β ∈C (X). See [25, Equation 2.3].

6 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

2.2. Subsurfaces. Suppose that X⊂S is a connected compact sub-

surface. We say X is essential exactly when all boundary components

of X are essential in S. We say that α∈AC (S) cuts X if all represen-

tatives of α intersect X. If some representative is disjoint then we say

α misses X.

Deﬁnition 2.4. An essential subsurface X⊂S is cleanly embedded if

for all components δ⊂∂X we have: δ is isotopic into ∂S if and only if

δ is equal to a component of ∂S.

Deﬁnition 2.5. Suppose X,Y ⊂S are essential subsurfaces. If X is

cleanly embedded in Y then we say that X is nested in Y . If ∂X cuts

Y and also ∂Y cuts X then we say that X and Y overlap.

A compact connected surface S is simple ifAC(S) has ﬁnite diameter.

Lemma 2.6. Suppose S is a connected compact surface. The following

are equivalent:

• S is not simple.

• The diameter of AC(S) is at least ﬁve.

• S admits an ending lamination or S =S1 or S0,2.

• S admits a pseudo-Anosov map or S =S1 or S0,2.

• χ(S)<−1 or S =S1,1,S 1,S 0,2.

Lemma 4.6 of [ 24] shows that pseudo-Anosov maps have quasi-geodesic

orbits, when acting on the associated curve complex. A Dehn twist

acting on C(S0,2) has geodesic orbits.

Note that Lemma 2.6 is only used in this paper when∂S is non-empty.

The closed case is included for completeness.

Proof sketch of Lemma 2.6. If S admits a pseudo-Anosov map then

the stable lamination is an ending lamination. If S admits a ﬁlling

lamination then, by an argument of Kobayashi [ 21],AC(S) has inﬁnite

diameter. (This argument is also sketched in [ 24], page 124, after the

statement of Proposition 4.6.)

If the diameter of AC is inﬁnite then the diameter is at least ﬁve.

To ﬁnish, one may check directly that all surfaces with χ(S) >−2,

other than S1,1, S1 and the annulus have AC(S) with diameter at

most four. (The diﬃcult cases, S012 and S003, are discussed by Scharle-

mann [35].) Alternatively, all surfaces with χ(S)<−1, and also S1,1,

admit pseudo-Anosov maps. The orientable cases follow from Thurston’s

construction [38]. Penner’s generalization [ 32] covers the non-orientable

cases. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 7

2.3. Handlebodies and disks. LetVg denote the handlebody of genus

g: the three-manifold obtained by taking a closed regular neighborhood

of a polygonal, ﬁnite, connected graph in R3. The genus of the boundary

is the genus of the handlebody. A properly embedded disk D⊂V is

essential if ∂D⊂∂V is essential.

Let D(V ) be the set of essential disks D⊂V , up to proper isotopy.

A subset ∆ ⊂D (V ) is a multidisk if for every D,E ∈ ∆ we have

ι(∂D,∂E ) = 0. Following McCullough [ 28] we place a simplical struc-

ture on D(V ) by taking multidisks to be simplices. As with the curve

complex, deﬁne dD to be the distance in the one-skeleton of D(V ).

2.4. Markings. A ﬁnite subset µ⊂AC (S) ﬁlls S if for all β∈C (S)

there is some α∈µ so that ι(α,β )> 0. For any pair of ﬁnite subsets

µ,ν ⊂AC (S) we extend the intersection number:

ι(µ,ν ) =

∑

α∈µ,β∈ν

ι(α,β ).

We say that µ,ν are L–close if ι(µ,ν )≤ L. We say that µ is a K–

marking if ι(µ,µ )≤ K. For any K,L we may deﬁneMK,L(S) to be

the graph where vertices are ﬁlling K–markings and edges are given by

L–closeness.

As deﬁned in [25] we have:

Deﬁnition 2.7. A complete clean marking µ ={αi}∪{ βi} consists of

• A collection of base curves base(µ) ={αi}: a maximal simplex

in C(S).

• A collection of transversal curves{βi}: for each i deﬁne Xi =

S∖ ⋃

j̸=iαj and take βi∈C (Xi) to be a Farey neighbor of αi.

If µ is a complete clean marking then ι(µ,µ )≤ 2ξ(S) + 6χ(S). As

discussed in [25] there are two kinds of elementary moves which con-

nected markings. There is a twist about a pants curve α, replacing its

transversal β by a new transversal β′ which is a Farey neighbor of both

α and β. We can ﬂip by swapping the roles of αi and βi. (In the case

of the ﬂip move, some of the other transversals must be cleaned.)

It follows that for any surface S there are choices of K,L so that

M(S) is non-empty and connected. We use dM(µ,ν ) to denote distance

in the marking graph.

3. Background on coarse geometry

Here we review a few ideas from coarse geometry. See [ 8], [12], or

[15] for a fuller discussion.

8 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

3.1. Quasi-isometry. Suppose r,s,A are non-negative real numbers,

with A≥ 1. If s≤A·r +A then we write s≤Ar. If s≤Ar and r≤As

then we write s =Ar and call r and s quasi-equal with constant A. We

also deﬁne the cut-oﬀ function [r]c where [r]c = 0 if r <c and [r]c =r

if r≥c.

Suppose that (X,dX ) and (Y,dY) are metric spaces. A relation

f :X →Y is an A–quasi-isometric embedding for A≥ 1 if, for every

x,y∈X ,

dX (x,y ) =AdY(f(x),f (y)).

The relation f is a quasi-isometry, and X is quasi-isometric to Y, if f

is an A–quasi-isometric embedding and the image of f is A–dense: the

A–neighborhood of the image equals all of Y.

3.2. Geodesics. Fix an interval [u,v ]⊂ R. A geodesic, connecting

x to y in X , is an isometric embedding f : [u,v ]→X with f(u) = x

and f(v) =y. Often the exact choice of f is unimportant and all that

matters are the endpoints x and y. We then denote the image of f by

[x,y ]⊂X .

Fix now intervals [m,n ], [p,q ]⊂ Z. An A–quasi-isometric embed-

ding g : [m,n ]→X is called an A–quasi-geodesic in X . A function

g : [m,n ]→X is an A–unparameterized quasi-geodesic in X if

• there is an increasing function ρ: [p,q ]→ [m,n ] so that g◦

ρ: [p,q ]→X is an A–quasi-geodesic in X and

• for all i∈ [p,q− 1], diam X (g [ρ(i),ρ (i + 1)])≤A.

(Compare to the deﬁnition of (K,δ,s )–quasi-geodesics found in [24].)

A subset Y⊂X is Q–quasi-convex if every X –geodesic connecting a

pair of points of Y lies within a Q–neighborhood of Y.

3.3. Hyperbolicity. We now assume that X is a connected graph with

metric induced by giving all edges length one.

Deﬁnition 3.1. The space X is δ–hyperbolic if, for any three points

x,y,z in X and for any geodesics k = [x,y ], g = [y,z ], h = [z,x ], the

triangle ghk is δ–slim: the δ–neighborhood of any two sides contains

the third.

An important tool for this paper is the following theorem of the ﬁrst

author and Minsky [24]:

Theorem 3.2. The curve complex of an orientable surface is Gromov

hyperbolic. □

For the remainder of this section we assume that X is δ–hyperbolic

graph, x,y,z ∈X are points, and k = [x,y ],g = [y,z ],h = [z,x ] are

geodesics.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 9

Deﬁnition 3.3. We take ρk :X→ k to be the closest points relation:

ρk(z) =

{

w∈k| for all v∈k, dX (z,w )≤dX (z,v )

}

.

We now list several lemmas useful in the sequel.

Lemma 3.4. There is a point on g within distance 2δ of ρk(z). The

same holds for h. □

Lemma 3.5. The closest points ρk(z) have diameter at most 4δ. □

Lemma 3.6. The diameter of ρg(x)∪ρh(y)∪ρk(z) is at most 6δ. □

Lemma 3.7. Suppose that z′ is another point in X so that dX (z,z′)≤

R. Then dX (ρk(z),ρk(z′))≤R + 6δ. □

Lemma 3.8. Suppose that k′ is another geodesic in X so that the

endpoints of k′ are within distance R of the points x and y. Then

dX(ρk(z),ρk′(z))≤R + 11δ. □

We now turn to a useful consequence of the Morse stability of quasi-

geodesics in hyperbolic spaces.

Lemma 3.9. For every δ and A there is a constant C with the fol-

lowing property: If X is δ–hyperbolic and g : [0,N ]→ Xis an A–

unparameterized quasi-geodesic then for any m < n < pin [0,N ] we

have:

dX (x,y ) +dX (y,z )<dX (x,z ) +C

wherex,y,z =g(m),g (n),g (p). □

3.4. A hyperbolicity criterion. Here we give a hyperbolicity crite-

rion tailored to our setting. We thank Brian Bowditch for both ﬁnding

an error in our ﬁrst proof of Theorem 3.11 and for informing us of

Gilman’s work [13, 14].

Suppose that X is a graph with all edge-lengths equal to one. Suppose

that γ : [0,N ] → X is a loop in X with unit speed. Any pair of

points a,b ∈ [0,N ] gives a chord of γ. If a < b, N/4≤ b−a and

N/4≤a + (N−b) then the chord is 1/4–separated. The length of the

chord is dX (γ(a),γ (b)).

Following Gilman [13, Theorem B] we have:

Theorem 3.10. Suppose that X is a graph with all edge-lengths equal

to one. Then X is Gromov hyperbolic if and only if there is a constant

K so that every loop γ : [0,N ]→X has a 1/4–separated chord of length

at most N/7 +K. □

Gilman’s proof goes via the subquadratic isoperimetric inequality.

We now give our criterion, noting that it is closely related to another

paper of Gilman [14].

10 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Theorem 3.11. Suppose that X is a graph with all edge-lengths equal

to one. Then X is Gromov hyperbolic if and only if there is a constant

M ≥ 0 and, for all unordered pairs x,y ∈X 0, there is a connected

subgraphgx,y containingx and y with the following properties:

• (Local) Ifd X (x,y )≤ 1 then gx,y has diameter at most M.

• (Slim triangles) For allx,y,z ∈X 0 the subgraphgx,y is contained

in an M–neighborhood ofgy,z∪gz,x.

Proof. Suppose that γ : [0,N ]→X is a loop. If ϵ is the empty string

let Iϵ = [0,N ]. For any binary string ω let Iω0 and Iω1 be the ﬁrst and

second half of Iω. Note that if |ω|≥⌈ log2N⌉ then|Iω|≤ 1.

Fix a string ω and let [a,b ] =Iω. Let gω be the subgraph connecting

γ(a) to γ(b). Note that g0 = g1 because γ(0) = γ(N). Also, for any

binary string ω the subgraphs gω,gω0,gω1 form an M–slim triangle. If

|ω|≤⌈ log2N⌉ then every x∈gω has some point b∈Iω so that

dX (x,γ (b))≤M(⌈log2N⌉−| ω|) + 2M.

Since g0 is connected there is a point x∈ g0 that lies within the

M–neighborhoods both of g00 and of g01. Pick some b∈ I1 so that

dX (x,γ (b)) is bounded as in the previous paragraph. It follows that

there is a point a∈I0 so that a,b are 1/4–separated and so that

dX (γ(a),γ (b))≤ 2M⌈log2N⌉ + 2M.

Thus there is an additive error K large enough so that X satisﬁes the

criterion of Theorem 3.10 and we are done. □

4. Natural maps

There are several natural maps between the complexes and graphs

deﬁned in Section 2. Here we review what is known about their geometric

properties, and give examples relevant to the rest of the paper.

4.1. Lifting, surgery, and subsurface projection. Suppose that

S is not simple. Choose a hyperbolic metric on the interior of S so

that all ends have inﬁnite areas. Fix a compact essential subsurface

X⊂S which is not a peripheral annulus. Let SX be the cover of S so

that X lifts homeomorphically and so that SX∼= interior(X). For any

α∈AC (S) let αX be the full preimage.

Since there is a homeomorphism between X and the Gromov com-

pactiﬁcation of SX in a small abuse of notation we identifyAC(X) with

the arc and curve complex of SX.

Deﬁnition 4.1. We deﬁne the cutting relation κX :AC(S)→AC (X)

as follows: α′∈κX(α) if and only if α′ is an essential non-peripheral

component of αX.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 11

Note that α cuts X if and only if κX(α) is non-empty. Now suppose

that S is not an annulus.

Deﬁnition 4.2. We deﬁne the surgery relation σX :AC(S)→C (S) as

follows: α′∈σS(α) if and only if α′∈C (S) is a boundary component

of a regular neighborhood of α∪∂S.

With S and X as above:

Deﬁnition 4.3. The subsurface projection relation πX :AC(S)→C (X)

is deﬁned as follows: If X is not an annulus then deﬁne πX =σX◦κX.

When X is an annulus πX =κX.

If α,β ∈AC (S) both cut X we write dX(α,β ) = diam X(πX(α)∪

πX(β)). This is the subsurface projection distance between α and β in

X.

Lemma 4.4. Suppose α,β ∈AC (S) are disjoint and cut X. Then

diam X(πX(α)),dX(α,β )≤ 3. □

See Lemma 2.3 of [ 25] and the remarks in the section Projection

Bounds in [29].

Corollary 4.5. Fix X⊂S. Suppose that {βi}N

i=0 is a path in AC(S).

Suppose that βi cuts X for all i. Then dX(β0,βN)≤ 3N + 3. □

It is crucial to note that if some vertex of {βi} misses X then the

projection distance dX(β0,βn) may be arbitrarily large compared to

n. Corollary 4.5 can be greatly strengthened when the path is a

geodesic [25]:

Theorem 4.6. [Bounded Geodesic Image] There is constant M0 with

the following property. Fix X⊂S. Suppose that {βi}n

i=0 is a geodesic

in C(S). Suppose that βi cuts X for all i. Then dX(β0,βn)≤M0. □

Here is a converse for Lemma 4.4.

Lemma 4.7. For every a ∈ N there is a number b ∈ N with the

following property: for any α,β ∈AC (S) if dX(α,β )≤a for all X⊂S

then ι(α,β )≤b.

Corollary D of [ 11] gives a more precise relation between projection

distance and intersection number.

Proof of Lemma 4.7. We only sketch the contrapositive: Suppose we

are given a sequence of curves αn,βn so that ι(αn,βn) tends to inﬁnity.

Passing to subsequences and applying elements of the mapping class

group we may assume that αn = α0 for all n. Setting cn = ι(α0,βn)

and passing to subsequences again we may assume that βn/cn converges

12 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

to λ∈PML (S), the projectivization of Thurston’s space of measured

laminations. Let Y be any connected component of the subsurface

ﬁlled by λ, chosen so that α0 cuts Y . Note that πY (βn) converges to

λ|Y . Again applying Kobayashi’s argument [ 21], the distance dY (α0,βn)

tends to inﬁnity. □

4.2. Inclusions. We now record a well known fact:

Lemma 4.8. The inclusion ν :C(S)→AC (S) is a quasi-isometry. The

surgery map σS :AC(S)→C (S) is a quasi-inverse for ν.

Proof. Fix α,β ∈C (S). Since ν is an inclusion we have dAC(α,β )≤

dS(α,β ). In the other direction, let {αi}N

i=0 be a geodesic in AC(S)

connecting α to β. Since every αi cuts S we apply Corollary 4.5 and

deduce dS(α,β )≤ 3N + 3.

Note that the composition σS◦ν = Id|C(S). Also, for any arc

α∈A (S) we have dAC(α,ν (σS(α))) = 1. Finally, C(S) is 1–dense in

AC(S), as any arc γ⊂ S is disjoint from the one or two curves of

σS(γ). □

Brian Bowditch raised the question, at the Newton Institute in August

2003, of the geometric properties of the inclusion A(S) → AC(S).

The natural assumption, that this inclusion is again a quasi-isometric

embedding, is false. In this paper we will exactly characterize how the

inclusion distorts distance.

We now move up a dimension. Suppose that V is a handlebody and

S =∂V . We may take any disk D∈D (V ) to its boundary ∂D∈C (S),

giving an inclusion ν :D(V )→C (S). It is important to distinguish the

disk complex from its image ν(D(V )); thus we will call the image the

disk set.

The ﬁrst author and Minsky [26] have shown:

Theorem 4.9. The disk set is a quasi-convex subset of the curve com-

plex. □

It is natural to ask if this map is a quasi-isometric embedding. If so,

the hyperbolicity of C(V ) immediately follows. In fact, the inclusion

again badly distorts distance and we investigate exactly how, below.

4.3. Markings and the mapping class group. Once the connect-

edness of M(S) is in hand, it is possible to use local ﬁniteness to show

that M(S) is quasi-isometric to the Cayley graph of the mapping class

group [25].

Using subsurface projections the ﬁrst author and Minsky [25] obtained

a distance estimate for the marking complex and thus for the mapping

class group.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 13

Theorem 4.10. There is a constantC0 =C0(S) so that, for any c≥C0

there is a constant A with

dM(µ,µ′) = A

∑

[dX(µ,µ′)]c

independent of the choice of µ and µ′. Here the sum ranges over all

essential, non-peripheral subsurfaces X⊂S.

This, and their similar estimate for the pants graph, is a model for the

distance estimates given below. Notice that a ﬁlling marking µ∈M (S)

cuts all essential, non-peripheral subsurfaces of S. It is not an accident

that the sum ranges over the same set.

5. Holes in general and the lower bound on distance

Suppose that S is a compact connected surface. In this paper a

combinatorial complex G(S) will have vertices being isotopy classes of

certain multicurves in S. We will assume throughout that vertices of

G(S) are connected by edges only if there are representatives which are

disjoint. This assumption is made only to simplify the proofs — all

arguments work in the case where adjacent vertices are allowed to have

uniformly bounded intersection. In all cases G will be connected. There

is a natural map ν :G→AC (S) taking a vertex of G to the isotopy

classes of the components. Examples in the literature include the

marking complex [25], the pants complex [ 9] [2], the Hatcher-Thurston

complex [19], the complex of separating curves [ 7], the arc complex and

the curve complexes themselves.

For any combinatorial complex G deﬁned in this paper other than

the curve complex we will denote distance in the one-skeleton of G by

dG(·,·). Distance in C(S) will always be denoted by dS(·,·).

5.1. Holes, deﬁned. Suppose that S is non-simple. Suppose that

G(S) is a combinatorial complex. Suppose that X⊂ S is an cleanly

embedded subsurface. A vertex α∈G cuts X if some component of α

cuts X.

Deﬁnition 5.1. We say X⊂S is a hole for G if every vertex of G cuts

X.

Almost equivalently, if X is a hole then the subsurface projection

πX :G(S)→C (X) never takes the empty set as a value. Note that

the entire surface S is always a hole, regardless of our choice of G. A

boundary parallel annulus cannot be cleanly embedded (unless S is also

an annulus), so generally cannot be a hole. A hole X⊂S is strict if X

is not homeomorphic to S.

We now classify the holes for A(S).

14 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Example 5.2. Suppose that S = Sg,b with b > 0 and consider the

arc complex A(S). The holes, up to isotopy, are exactly the cleanly

embedded surfaces which contain ∂S. So, for example, if S is planar

then only S is a hole for A(S). The same holds for S =S1,1. In these

cases it is an exercise to show that C(S) and A(S) are quasi-isometric.

In all other cases the arc complex admits inﬁnitely many holes.

Deﬁnition 5.3. If X is a hole and if πX(G)⊂C (X) has diameter at

least R we say that the hole X has diameter at least R.

Example 5.4. Continuing the example above: Since the mapping class

group acts on the arc complex, all non-simple holes for A(S) have

inﬁnite diameter.

Suppose now that X,X′⊂S are disjoint holes for G. In the presence

of symmetry there can be a relationship between πX|G and πX ′|G as

follows:

Deﬁnition 5.5. Suppose that X,X′ are holes for G, both of inﬁnite

diameter. Then X and X′ are paired if there is a homeomorphism

τ : X→X′ and a constant L4 so that

dX ′(πX ′(γ),τ (πX(γ)))≤L4

for every γ∈G . Furthermore, if Y⊂X is a hole then τ pairs Y with

Y′ = τ(Y ). Lastly, pairing is required to be symmetric; if τ pairs X

with X′ then τ−1 pairs X′ with X.

Deﬁnition 5.6. Two holes X and Y interfere if either X∩Y̸=∅ or

X is paired with X′ and X′∩Y̸=∅.

Examples arise in the symmetric arc complex and in the discussion

of twisted I–bundles inside of a handlebody.

5.2. Projection to holes is coarsely Lipschitz. The following lem-

ma is used repeatedly throughout the paper:

Lemma 5.7. Suppose that G(S) is a combinatorial complex. Suppose

that X is a hole for G. Then for any α,β ∈G we have

dX(α,β )≤ 3 + 3·dG(α,β ).

The additive error is required only when α =β.

Proof. This follows directly from Corollary 4.5 and our assumption that

vertices of G connected by an edge represent disjoint multicurves. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 15

5.3. Inﬁnite diameter holes. We may now state a ﬁrst answer to

Bowditch’s question.

Lemma 5.8. Suppose that G(S) is a combinatorial complex. Suppose

that there is a strict hole X ⊂ S having inﬁnite diameter. Then

ν :G→AC (S) is not a quasi-isometric embedding. □

This lemma and Example 5.2 completely determines when the in-

clusion of A(S) intoAC(S) is a quasi-isometric embedding. It quickly

becomes clear that the set of holes tightly constrains the intrinsic

geometry of a combinatorial complex.

Lemma 5.9. Suppose that G(S) is a combinatorial complex invariant

under the natural action of MCG(S). Then every non-simple hole for G

has inﬁnite diameter. Furthermore, if X,Y ⊂S are disjoint non-simple

holes for G then there is a quasi-isometric embedding of Z2 into G. □

We will not use Lemmas 5.8 or 5.9 and so omit the proofs. Instead

our interest lies in proving the far more powerful distance estimate

(Theorems 5.10 and 13.1) for G(S).

5.4. A lower bound on distance. Here we see that the sum of

projection distances in holes gives a lower bound for distance.

Theorem 5.10. Fix S, a compact connected non-simple surface. Sup-

pose that G(S) is a combinatorial complex. Then there is a constant C0

so that for all c≥C0 there is a constant A satisfying

∑

[dX(α,β )]c≤AdG(α,β ).

Here α,β ∈G and the sum is taken over all holes X for the complex

G. □

The proof follows the proof of Theorems 6.10 and 6.12 of [ 25], practi-

cally word for word. The only changes necessary are to

• replace the sum over all subsurfaces by the sum over all holes,

• replace Lemma 2.5 of [25], which records how markings diﬀering

by an elementary move project to an essential subsurface, by

Lemma 5.7 of this paper, which records how G projects to a

hole.

One major goal of this paper is to give criteria suﬃcient obtain the

reverse inequality; Theorem 13.1.

16 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

6. Holes for the non-orientable surface

Fix F a compact, connected, and non-orientable surface. Let S be the

orientation double cover with covering map ρF : S→F . Let τ : S→S

be the associated involution; so for all x∈S, ρF (x) =ρF (τ(x)).

Deﬁnition 6.1. A multicurve γ⊂AC (S) is symmetric if τ(γ)∩γ =∅

or τ(γ) =γ. A multicurve γ is invariant if there is a curve or arc γ′⊂F

so that γ =ρ−1

F (γ′). The same deﬁnitions holds for subsurfaces X⊂S.

Deﬁnition 6.2. The invariant complexCτ(S) is the simplicial complex

with vertex set being isotopy classes of invariant multicurves. There is

a k–simplex for every collection of k + 1 distinct isotopy classes having

pairwise disjoint representatives.

Notice thatCτ(S) is simplicially isomorphic to C(F ). There is also a

natural map ν :Cτ(S)→C (S). We will prove:

Lemma 6.3. ν :Cτ(S)→C (S) is a quasi-isometric embedding.

It thus follows from the hyperbolicity of C(S) that:

Corollary 6.4 ([4]).C(F ) is Gromov hyperbolic. □

We begin the proof of Lemma 6.3: since ν sends adjacent vertices to

adjacent edges we have

(6.5) dS(α,β )≤dCτ (α,β ),

as long as α and β are distinct inCτ(S). In fact, since the surface S

itself is a hole for Cτ(S) we may deduce a slightly weaker lower bound

from Lemma 5.7 or indeed from Theorem 5.10.

The other half of the proof of Lemma 6.3 consists of showing that

S is the only hole forCτ(S) with large diameter. After a discussion of

Teichm¨ uller geodesics we will prove:

Lemma 16.4. There is a constant K with the following property:

Suppose that α,β are invariant multicurves in S. Suppose that X⊂S

is an essential subsurface where dX(α,β )>K . Then X is symmetric.

From this it follows that:

Corollary 6.6. With K as in Lemma 16.4: If X⊂ S is a hole for

Cτ(S) with diameter greater than K then X =S.

Proof. Suppose that X⊂ S is a strict subsurface, cleanly embedded.

Suppose that diam X(Cτ(S)) > K. Thus X is symmetric. It follows

that ∂X ∖∂S is also symmetric. Since ∂X does not cut X deduce that

X is not a hole for Cτ(S). □

This corollary, together with the upper bound (Theorem 13.1), proves

Lemma 6.3.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 17

7. Holes for the arc complex

Here we generalize the deﬁnition of the arc complex and classify its

holes.

Deﬁnition 7.1. Suppose that S is a non-simple surface with boundary.

Let ∆ be a non-empty collection of components of ∂S. The arc complex

A(S, ∆) is the subcomplex of A(S) spanned by essential arcs α⊂ S

with ∂α⊂ ∆.

Note that A(S,∂S ) and A(S) are identical.

Lemma 7.2. Suppose X⊂S is cleanly embedded. Then X is a hole

for A(S, ∆) if and only if ∆⊂∂X . □

This follows directly from the deﬁnition of a hole. We now have an

straight-forward observation:

Lemma 7.3. If X,Y ⊂S are holes for A(S, ∆) then X∩Y̸=∅. □

The proof follows immediately from Lemma 7.2. Lemma 5.9 indi-

cates that Lemma 7.3 is essential to proving that A(S, ∆) is Gromov

hyperbolic.

In order to prove the upper bound theorem for A we will use pants

decompositions of the surface S. In an attempt to avoid complications

in the non-orientable case we must carefully lift to the orientation cover.

Suppose that F is non-simple, non-orientable, and has non-empty

boundary. Let ρF : S→ F be the orientation double cover and let

τ : S→S be the induced involution. Fix ∆′⊂∂F and let ∆ = ρ−1

F (∆′).

Deﬁnition 7.4. We deﬁneAτ(S, ∆) to be the invariant arc complex:

vertices are invariant multi-arcs and simplices arise from disjointness.

Again,Aτ(S, ∆) is simplicially isomorphic to A(F, ∆′). If X∩τ(X) =

∅ and ∆⊂X∪τ(X) then the subsurfaces X and τ(X) are paired holes,

as in Deﬁnition 5.5. Notice as well that all non-simple symmetric holes

X⊂S forAτ(S, ∆) have inﬁnite diameter.

Unlike A(F, ∆′) the complexAτ(S, ∆) may have disjoint holes. None-

theless, we have:

Lemma 7.5. Any two non-simple holes for Aτ(S, ∆) interfere.

Proof. Suppose that X,Y are holes for the τ–invariant arc complex,

Aτ(S, ∆). It follows from Lemma 16.4 that X is symmetric with

∆⊂X∪τ(X). The same holds for Y . Thus Y must cut either X or

τ(X). □

18 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

8. Background on three-manifolds

Before discussing the holes in the disk complex, we record a few facts

about handlebodies and I–bundles.

Fix M a compact connected irreducible three-manifold. Recall that

M is irreducible if every embedded two-sphere in M bounds a three-ball.

Recall that if N is a closed submanifold of M then fr(N), the frontier

of N in M, is the closure of ∂N ∖∂M .

8.1. Compressions. Suppose that F is a surface embedded in M.

Then F is compressible if there is a disk B embedded in M with

B∩∂M =∅, B∩F =∂B, and ∂B essential in F . Any such disk B is

called a compression of F .

In this situation form a new surface F′ as follows: Let N be a closed

regular neighborhood of B. First remove from F the annulus N∩F .

Now form F′ by gluing on both disk components of ∂N ∖F . We say

that F′ is obtained by compressing F along B. If no such disk exists

we say F is incompressible.

Deﬁnition 8.1. A properly embedded surface F is boundary compress-

ible if there is a disk B embedded in M with

• interior(B)∩∂M =∅,

• ∂B is a union of connected arcs α and β,

• α∩β =∂α =∂β,

• B∩F =α and α is properly embedded in F ,

• B∩∂M =β, and

• β is essential in ∂M ∖∂F .

A disk, like B, with boundary partitioned into two arcs is called a

bigon. Note that this deﬁnition of boundary compression is slightly

weaker than some found in the literature; the arc α is often required to

be essential in F . We do not require this additional property because,

for us, F will usually be a properly embedded disk in a handlebody.

Just as for compressing disks we may boundary compress F along B

to obtain a new surface F′: Let N be a closed regular neighborhood of

B. First remove from F the rectangle N∩F . Now form F′ by gluing on

both bigon components of fr(N)∖F . Again, F′ is obtained by boundary

compressing F along B. Note that the relevant boundary components

of F and F′ cobound a pair of pants embedded in ∂M . If no boundary

compression exists then F is boundary incompressible.

Remark 8.2. Recall that any surface F properly embedded in a han-

dlebody Vg, g≥ 2, is either compressible or boundary compressible.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 19

Suppose now that F is properly embedded in M and Γ is a multicurve

in ∂M .

Remark 8.3. Suppose that F′ is obtained by a boundary compression

of F performed in the complement of Γ. Suppose that F′ =F1∩F2 is

disconnected and each Fi cuts Γ. Then ι(∂Fi, Γ)<ι (∂F, Γ) for i = 1, 2.

It is often useful to restrict our attention to boundary compressions

meeting a single subsurface of ∂M . So suppose that X⊂ ∂M is an

essential subsurface. Suppose that ∂F is tight with respect to ∂X.

Suppose B is a boundary compression of F . If B∩∂M⊂ X we say

that F is boundary compressible into X.

Lemma 8.4. Suppose that M is irreducible. Fix X a connected essential

subsurface of ∂M . Let F⊂M be a properly embedded, incompressible

surface. Suppose that ∂X and ∂F are tight and that X compresses in

M. Then either:

• F∩X =∅,

• F is boundary compressible into X, or

• F is a disk with ∂F⊂X.

Proof. Suppose that X is compressible via a disk E. Isotope E to make

∂E tight with respect to ∂F . This can be done while maintaining

∂E⊂X because ∂F and ∂X are tight. Since M is irreducible and F

is incompressible we may isotope E, rel ∂, to remove all simple closed

curves of F∩E. If F∩E is non-empty then an outermost bigon of E

gives the desired boundary compression lying in X.

Suppose instead that F∩E =∅ but F does cut X. Let δ⊂X be

a simple arc meeting each of F and E in exactly one endpoint. Let

N be a closed regular neighborhood of δ∪E. Note that fr(N)∖F has

three components. One is a properly embedded disk parallel to E and

the other two B,B′ are bigons attached to F . At least one of these,

say B′ is trivial in the sense that B′∩∂M is a trivial arc embedded

in ∂M ∖∂F . If B is non-trivial then B provides the desired boundary

compression.

Suppose that B is also trivial. It follows that ∂E and one component

γ⊂ ∂F cobound an annulus A⊂ X. So D = A∪E is a disk with

(D,∂D )⊂ (M,F ). As ∂D = γ and F is incompressible and M is

irreducible deduce that F is isotopic to E. □

8.2. Band sums. A band sum is the inverse operation to boundary

compression: Fix a pair of disjoint properly embedded surfaces F1,F 2⊂

M. Let F′ =F1∪F2. Fix a simple arc δ⊂∂M so that δ meets each of

F1 and F2 in exactly one point of ∂δ. Let N⊂M be a closed regular

20 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

neighborhood of δ. Form a new surface by adding to F′∖N the rectangle

component of fr(N)∖F′. The surface F obtained is the result of band

summing F1 to F2 along δ. Note that F has a boundary compression

dual to δ yielding F′: that is, there is a boundary compression B for F

so that δ∩B is a single point and compressing F along B gives F′.

8.3. Handlebodies and I-bundles. Recall that handlebodies are ir-

reducible.

Suppose that F is a compact connected surface with at least one

boundary component. Let T be the orientation I–bundle over F . If F

is orientable then T∼=F×I. If F is not orientable then T is the unique

I–bundle over F with orientable total space. We call T the I–bundle

and F the base space. Let ρF : T→F be the associated bundle map.

Note that T is homeomorphic to a handlebody.

If A⊂T is a union of ﬁbers of the map ρF then A is vertical with

respect to T . In particular take ∂vT = ρ−1

F (∂F ) to be the vertical

boundary of T . Take ∂hT to be the union of the boundaries of all of the

ﬁbers: this is the horizontal boundary of T . Note that ∂hT is always

incompressible in T while ∂vT is incompressible in T as long as F is

not homeomorphic to a disk.

Note that, as |∂vT|≥ 1, any vertical surface in T can be bound-

ary compressed. However no vertical surface in T may be boundary

compressed into ∂hT .

We end this section with:

Lemma 8.5. Suppose that F is a compact, connected surface with

∂F̸=∅. Let ρF : T→F be the orientation I–bundle over F . Let X be

a component of ∂hT . Let D⊂T be a properly embedded disk. If

• ∂D is essential in ∂T ,

• ∂D and ∂X are tight, and

• D cannot be boundary compressed into X

then D may be properly isotoped to be vertical with respect to T . □

9. Holes for the disk complex

Here we begin to classify the holes for the disk complex, a more

diﬃcult analysis than that of the arc complex. To ﬁx notation let V

be a handlebody. Let S = Sg = ∂V . Recall that there is a natural

inclusion ν :D(V )→C (S).

Remark 9.1. The notion of a hole X⊂∂V for D(V ) may be phrased

in several diﬀerent ways:

• every essential disk D⊂V cuts the surface X,

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 21

• S∖X is incompressible in V , or

• X is disk-busting in V .

The classiﬁcation of holes X⊂S for D(V ) breaks roughly into three

cases: either X is an annulus, is compressible in V , or is incompressible

in V . In each case we obtain a result:

Theorem 10.1. Suppose X is a hole for D(V ) and X is an annulus.

Then the diameter of X is at most 5.

Theorem 11.6. Suppose X is a compressible hole for D(V ) with di-

ameter at least 15. Then there are a pair of essential disks D,E ⊂V

so that

• ∂D,∂E ⊂X and

• ∂D and ∂E ﬁll X.

Theorem 12.1. Suppose X is an incompressible hole for D(V ) with

diameter at least 61. Then there is an I–bundle ρF : T→F embedded

in V so that

• ∂hT⊂S,

• X is isotopic in S to a component of ∂hT ,

• some component of ∂vT is boundary parallel into S,

• F supports a pseudo-Anosov map.

As a corollary of these theorems we have:

Corollary 9.2. If X is hole for D(V ) with diameter at least 61 then

X has inﬁnite diameter.

Proof. IfX is a hole with diameter at least 61 then either Theorem 11.6

or Theorem 12.1 applies.

If X is compressible then Dehn twists, in opposite directions, about

the given disks D and E yields an automorphism f : V → V so that

f|X is pseudo-Anosov. This follows from Thurston’s construction [ 38].

By Lemma 2.6 the hole X has inﬁnite diameter.

If X is incompressible then X⊂∂hT where ρF : T→F is the given

I–bundle. Let f : F→F be the given pseudo-Anosov map. So g, the

suspension of f, gives a automorphism of V . Again it follows that the

hole X has inﬁnite diameter. □

Applying Lemma 5.8 we ﬁnd another corollary:

Theorem 9.3. If S = ∂V contains a strict hole with diameter at

least 61 then the inclusion ν :D(V )→C (S) is not a quasi-isometric

embedding. □

22 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

10. Holes for the disk complex – annuli

The proof of Theorem 10.1 occupies the rest of this section. This proof

shares many features with the proofs of Theorems 11.6 and 12.1. How-

ever, the exceptional deﬁnition of C(S0,2) prevents a uniﬁed approach.

Fix V , a handlebody.

Theorem 10.1. Suppose X is a hole for D(V ) and X is an annulus.

Then the diameter of X is at most 5.

We begin with:

Claim. For all D∈D (V ),|D∩X|≥ 2.

Proof. Since X is a hole, every disk cuts X. Since X is an annulus,

let α be a core curve for X. If |D∩X| = 1, then we may band sum

parallel copies of D along an subarc of α. The resulting disk misses α,

a contradiction. □

Assume, to obtain a contradiction, that X has diameter at least 6.

Suppose that D∈D (V ) is a disk chosen to minimize D∩X. Among

all disks E∈D (V ) with dX(D,E )≥ 3 choose one which minimizes

|D∩E|. Isotope D and E to make the boundaries tight and also

tight with respect to ∂X. Tightening triples of curves is not canonical;

nonetheless there is a tightening so that S∖(∂D∪∂E∪X) contains

no triangles. See Figure 1.

Figure 1. Triangles outside of X (see the left side) can

be moved in (see the right side). This decreases the

number of points of D∩E∩ (S∖X).

After this tightening we have:

Claim. Every arc of ∂D∩X meets every arc of ∂E∩X at least once.

Proof. Fix components arcs α⊂D∩X and β⊂E∩X. Let α′,β′ be

the corresponding arcs in SX the annular cover of S corresponding to

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 23

X. After the tightening we ﬁnd that

|α∩β|≥| α′∩β′|− 1.

Since dX(D,E )≥ 3 Equation 2.3 implies that |α′∩β′|≥ 2. Thus

|α∩β|≥ 1, as desired. □

Claim. There is an outermost bigon B⊂ E∖D with the following

properties:

• ∂B =α∪β where α =B∩D, β =∂B ∖α⊂∂E,

• ∂α =∂β⊂X, and

•| β∩X| = 2.

Furthermore,|D∩X| = 2.

See the lower right of Figure 2 for a picture.

Proof. Consider the intersection of D and E, thought of as a collection

of arcs and curves in E. Any simple closed curve component of D∩E

can be removed by an isotopy of E, ﬁxed on the boundary. (This follows

from the irreducibility of V and an innermost disk argument.) Since

we have assumed that|D∩E| is minimal it follows that there are no

simple closed curves in D∩E.

So consider any outermost bigon B⊂ E∖D. Let α = B∩D. Let

β = ∂B ∖α = B∩∂V . Note that β cannot completely contain a

component of E∩X as this would contradict either the fact that B

is outermost or the claim that every arc of E∩X meets some arc of

D∩X. Using this observation, Figure 2 lists the possible ways for B

to lie inside of E.

E

α

Figure 2. The arc α cuts a bigon B oﬀ of E. The darker

part of∂E are the arcs of E∩X. Either β is disjoint from

X, β is contained in X, β meets X in a single subarc, or

β meets X in two subarcs.

Let D′ and D′′ be the two essential disks obtained by boundary

compressing D along the bigon B. Suppose α is as shown in one of the

24 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

ﬁrst three pictures of Figure 2. It follows that either D′ or D′′ has, after

tightening, smaller intersection with X than D does, a contradiction.

We deduce that α is as pictured in lower right of Figure 2.

Boundary compressing D along B still gives disks D′,D′′∈D (V ).

As these cannot have smaller intersection with X we deduce that

|D∩X|≤ 2 and the claim holds. □

Using the same notation as in the proof above, let B be an outermost

bigon of E∖D. We now study how α⊂∂B lies inside of D.

Claim. The arc α⊂D connects distinct components of D∩X.

Proof. Suppose not. Then there is a bigon C⊂D∖α with ∂C =α∪γ

and γ⊂∂D∩X. The disk C∪B is essential and intersects X at most

once after tightening, contradicting our ﬁrst claim. □

We ﬁnish the proof of Theorem 10.1 by noting that D∪B is homeo-

morphic to Υ×I where Υ is the simplicial tree with three edges and three

leaves. We may choose the homeomorphism so that (D∪B)∩X = Υ×∂I.

It follows that we may properly isotope D∪B until (D∪B)∩X is a

pair of arcs. Recall that D′ and D′′ are the disks obtained by boundary

compressing D along B. It follows that one of D′ or D′′ (or both) meets

X in at most a single arc, contradicting our ﬁrst claim. □

11. Holes for the disk complex – compressible

The proof of Theorem 11.6 occupies the second half of this section.

11.1. Compression sequences of essential disks. Fix a multicurve

Γ⊂S =∂V . Fix also an essential disk D⊂V . Properly isotope D to

make∂D tight with respect to Γ.

If D∩ Γ̸=∅ we may deﬁne:

Deﬁnition 11.1. A compression sequence{∆k}n

k=1 starting at D has

∆1 ={D} and ∆k+1 is obtained from ∆k via a boundary compression,

disjoint from Γ, and tightening. Note that ∆ k is a collection of exactly

k pairwise disjoint disks properly embedded in V . We further require,

for k≤n, that every disk of ∆k meets some component of Γ. We call a

compression sequence maximal if either

• no disk of ∆n can be boundary compressed into S∖Γ or

• there is a component Z⊂S∖Γ and a boundary compression of

∆n into S∖Γ yielding an essential disk E with ∂E⊂Z.

We say that such maximal sequences end essentially or end in Z,

respectively.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 25

All compression sequences must end, by Remark 8.3. Given a maximal

sequence we may relate the various disks in the sequence as follows:

Deﬁnition 11.2. Fix X, a component of S∖Γ. Fix Dk ∈ ∆k. A

disjointness pair for Dk is an ordered pair (α,β ) of essential arcs in X

where

• α⊂Dk∩X,

• β⊂ ∆n∩X, and

• dA(α,β )≤ 1.

Ifα̸=α′ then the two disjointness pairs (α,β ) and (α′,β ) are distinct,

even if α is properly isotopic to α′. A similar remark holds for the

second coordinate.

The following lemma controls how subsurface projection distance

changes in maximal sequences.

Lemma 11.3. Fix a multicurve Γ⊂ S. Suppose that D cuts Γ and

choose a maximal sequence starting at D. Fix any component X⊂S∖Γ.

Fix any disk Dk∈ ∆k. Then either Dk∈ ∆n or there are four distinct

disjointness pairs{(αi,βi)}4

i=1 for Dk in X where each of the arcs {αi}

appears as the ﬁrst coordinate of at most two pairs.

Proof. We induct onn−k. If Dk is contained in ∆n there is nothing to

prove. If Dk is contained in ∆k+1 we are done by induction. Thus we

may assume that Dk is the disk of ∆k which is boundary compressed

at stage k. Let Dk+1,D′

k+1∈ ∆k+1 be the two disks obtained after

boundary compressing Dk along the bigon B. See Figure 3 for a picture

of the pair of pants cobounded by ∂Dk and ∂Dk+1∪∂D′

k+1.

δ

Dk

Dk+1 D′

k+1

Γ

Figure 3. All arcs connecting Dk to itself or to Dk+1∪

D′

k+1 are arcs of Γ∩P . The boundary compressing arc

B∪S meets Dk twice and is parallel to the vertical arcs

of Γ∩P .

Let δ be a band sum arc dual to B (the dotted arc in Figure 3). We

may assume that|Γ∩δ| is minimal over all arcs dual to B. It follows that

26 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

the band sum of Dk+1 with D′

k+1 along δ is tight, without any isotopy.

(This is where we use the fact that B is a boundary compression in the

complement of Γ, as opposed to being a general boundary compression

of Dk in V .)

There are now three possibilities: neither, one, or both points of ∂δ

are contained in X.

First suppose that X∩∂δ =∅. Then every arc of Dk+1∩X is parallel

to an arc of Dk∩X, and similarly for D′

k+1. If Dk+1 and D′

k+1 are

both components of ∆ n then choose any arcs β,β′ of Dk+1∩X and

of D′

k+1∩X. Let α,α′ be the parallel components of Dk∩X. The

four disjointness pairs are then (α,β ), (α,β′), (α′,β ), (α′,β′). Suppose

instead that Dk+1 is not a component of ∆ n. Then Dk inherits four

disjointness pairs from Dk+1.

Second suppose that exactly one endpoint x∈ ∂δ meets X. Let

γ⊂Dk+1 be the component of Dk+1∩X containingx. Let X′ be the

component of X∩P that containsx and let α,α′ be the two components

of Dk∩X′. Let β be any arc of D′

k+1∩X.

If Dk+1 /∈ ∆n and γ is not the ﬁrst coordinate of one of Dk+1’s four

pairs then Dk inherits disjointness pairs from Dk+1. If D′

k+1 /∈ ∆n then

Dk inherits disjointness pairs from D′

k+1.

Thus we may assume that both Dk+1 and D′

k+1 are in ∆n or that

only D′

k+1∈ ∆n while γ appears as the ﬁrst arc of disjointness pair for

Dk+1. In case of the former the required disjointness pairs are ( α,β ),

(α′,β ), (α,γ ), and (α′,γ ). In case of the latter we do not know if γ is

allowed to appear as the second coordinate of a pair. However we are

given four disjointness pairs for Dk+1 and are told that γ appears as

the ﬁrst coordinate of at most two of these pairs. Hence the other two

pairs are inherited by Dk. The pairs (α,β ) and (α′,β ) give the desired

conclusion.

Third suppose that the endpoints of δ meet γ⊂Dk+1 and γ′⊂D′

k+1.

Let X′ be a component of X∩P containing γ. Let α and α′ be the

two arcs of Dk∩X′. Suppose both Dk+1 and D′

k+1 lie in ∆n. Then the

desired pairs are (α,γ ), (α′,γ ), (α,γ′), and (α′,γ′). If D′

k+1∈ ∆n while

Dk+1 is not then Dk inherits two pairs from Dk+1. We add to these the

pairs (α,γ′), and (α′,γ′). If neither disk lies in ∆ n thenDk inherits two

pairs from each disk and the proof is complete. □

Given a disk D∈D (V ) and a hole X⊂S our Lemma 11.3 allows us

to adapt D to X.

Lemma 11.4. Fix a hole X⊂ S for D(V ). For any disk D∈D (V )

there is a disk D′ with the following properties:

• ∂X and ∂D′ are tight.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 27

• If X is incompressible then D′ is not boundary compressible into

X and dA(D,D′)≤ 3.

• If X is compressible then ∂D′⊂X and dAC(D,D′)≤ 3.

Here A =A(X) andAC =AC(X).

Proof. If∂D⊂X then the lemma is trivial. So assume, by Remark 9.1,

that D cuts ∂X. Choose a maximal sequence with respect to ∂X

starting at D.

Suppose that the sequence is non-trivial ( n >1). By Lemma 11.3

there is a disk E∈ ∆n so that D∩X and E∩X contain disjoint arcs.

If the sequence ends essentially then choose D′ =E and the lemma is

proved. If the sequence ends in X then there is a boundary compression

of ∆n, disjoint from ∂X, yielding the desired disk D′ with ∂D′⊂ X.

Since E∩D′ =∅ we again obtain the desired bound.

Assume now that the sequence is trivial (n = 1). Then take E =D∈

∆n and the proof is identical to that of the previous paragraph. □

Remark 11.5. Lemma 11.4 is unexpected: after all, any pair of curves

in C(X) can be connected by a sequence of band sums. Thus arbitrary

band sums can change the subsurface projection to X. However, the

sequences of band sums arising in Lemma 11.4 are very special. Firstly

they do not cross ∂X and secondly they are “tree-like” due to the fact

every arc in D is separating.

When D is replaced by a surface with genus then Lemma 11.4 does not

hold in general; this is a fundamental observation due to Kobayashi [ 21]

(see also [17]). Namazi points out that even if D is only replaced by a

planar surface Lemma 11.4 does not hold in general.

11.2. Proving the theorem. We now prove:

Theorem 11.6. Suppose X is a compressible hole for D(V ) with di-

ameter at least 15. Then there are a pair of essential disks D,E ⊂V

so that

• ∂D,∂E ⊂X and

• ∂D and ∂E ﬁll X.

Proof. Choose disks D′ and E′ in D(V ) so that dX(D′,E′)≥ 15. By

Lemma 11.4 there are disks D and E so that∂D,∂E ⊂X,dX(D′,D )≤

6, and dX(E′,E )≤ 6. It follows from the triangle inequality that

dX(D,E )≥ 3. □

12. Holes for the disk complex – incompressible

This section classiﬁes incompressible holes for the disk complex.

28 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Theorem 12.1. Suppose X is an incompressible hole for D(V ) with

diameter at least 61. Then there is an I–bundle ρF : T→F embedded

in V so that

• ∂hT⊂∂V ,

• X is a component of ∂hT ,

• some component of ∂vT is boundary parallel into ∂V ,

• F supports a pseudo-Anosov map.

Here is a short plan of the proof: We are given X, an incompressible

hole for D(V ). Following Lemma 11.4 we may assume that D,E are

essential disks, without boundary compressions into X or S∖X, with

dX(D,E )> 43. Examine the intersection pattern of D and E to ﬁnd

two families of rectangles R and Q. The intersection pattern of these

rectangles in V will determine the desired I–bundle T . The third

conclusion of the theorem follows from standard facts about primitive

annuli. The fourth requires another application of Lemma 11.4 as well

as Lemma 2.6.

12.1. Diagonals of polygons. To understand the intersection pattern

of D and E we discuss diagonals of polygons. Let D be a 2n sided

regular polygon. Label the sides of D with the letters X and Y in

alternating fashion. Any side labeled X (or Y ) will be called an X side

(or Y side).

Deﬁnition 12.2. An arc γ properly embedded in D is a diagonal if

the points of ∂γ lie in the interiors of distinct sides of D. If γ and γ′

are diagonals for D which together meet three diﬀerent sides then γ

and γ′ are non-parallel.

Lemma 12.3. Suppose that Γ⊂D is a collection of pairwise disjoint

non-parallel diagonals. Then there is an X side of D meeting at most

eight diagonals of Γ.

Proof. A counting argument shows that|Γ|≤ 4n− 3. If every X side

meets at least nine non-parallel diagonals then |Γ|≥ 9

2n >4n− 3, a

contradiction. □

12.2. Improving disks. Suppose now that X is an incompressible hole

for D(V ) with diameter at least 61. Note that, by Theorem 10.1, X is

not an annulus. Let Y =S∖X.

Choose disks D′ and E′ in V so thatd X(D′,E′)≥ 61. By Lemma 11.4

there are a pair of disks D and E so that both are essential in V , cannot

be boundary compressed into X or into Y , and so that dA(X)(D′,D )≤

3 and dA(X)(E′,E )≤ 3. Thus dX(D′,D )≤ 9 and dX(E′,E )≤ 9

(Lemma 5.7). By the triangle inequality dX(D,E )≥ 61− 18 = 43.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 29

Recall, as well, that ∂D and ∂E are tight with respect to ∂X. We

may further assume that∂D and∂E are tight with respect to each other.

Also, minimize the quantities|X∩(∂D∩∂E)| and|D∩E| while keeping

everything tight. In particular, there are no triangle components of

∂V ∖(D∪E∪∂X). Now consider D and E to be even-sided polygons,

with vertices being the points ∂D∩∂X and ∂E∩∂X respectively. Let

Γ =D∩E. See Figure 4 for one a priori possible collection Γ⊂D.

Figure 4. In fact, Γ⊂D cannot contain simple closed

curves or non-diagonals.

From our assumptions and the irreducibility of V it follows that Γ

contains no simple closed curves. Suppose now that there is a γ⊂ Γ so

that, in D, both endpoints of γ lie in the same side of D. Then there

is an outermost such arc, say γ′⊂ Γ, cutting a bigon B out of D. It

follows that B is a boundary compression of E which is disjoint from

∂X. But this contradicts the construction of E. We deduce that all

arcs of Γ are diagonals for D and, via a similar argument, for E.

Let α⊂ D∩X be an X side of D meeting at most eight distinct

types of diagonal of Γ. Choose β⊂E∩X similarly. As dX(D,E )≥ 43

we have that dX(α,β )≥ 43− 6 = 37.

Now break each of α and β into at most eight subarcs{αi} and{βj}

so that each subarc meets all of the diagonals of ﬁxed type and only

of that type. Let Ri⊂ D be the rectangle with upper boundary αi

and containing all of the diagonals meeting αi. Let α′

i be the lower

boundary of Ri. Deﬁne Qj and β′

j similarly. See Figure 5 for a picture

of Ri.

Call an arc αi large if there is an arc βj so that|αi∩βj|≥ 3. We

use the same notation for βj. Let Θ be the union of all of the large αi

and βj. Thus Θ is a four-valent graph in X. Let Θ′ be the union of the

corresponding large α′

i and β′

i.

Claim 12.4. The graph Θ is non-empty.

30 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Ri

αi

α′

i

Figure 5. The rectangle Ri⊂D is surrounded by the

dotted line. The arc αi in∂D∩X is indicated. In general

the arc α′

i may lie in X or in Y .

Proof. If Θ = ∅, then all αi are small. It follows that |α∩β|≤ 128

and thus dX(α,β )≤ 16, by Lemma 2.2. As dX(α,β )≥ 37 this is a

contradiction. □

Let Z⊂ ∂V be a small regular neighborhood of Θ and deﬁne Z′

similarly.

Claim 12.5. No component of Θ or of Θ′ is contained in a disk D⊂∂V .

No component of Θ or of Θ ′ is contained in an annulus A⊂∂V that is

peripheral in X.

Proof. For a contradiction suppose that W is a component of Z con-

tained in a disk. Then there is some pair αi,βj having a bigon in ∂V .

This contradicts the tightness of ∂D and ∂E. The same holds for Z′.

Suppose now that some component W is contained in an annulus A,

peripheral in X. Thus W ﬁlls A. Suppose that αi and βj are large and

contained in W . By the classiﬁcation of arcs in A we deduce that either

αi and βj form a bigon in A or ∂X, αi and βj form a triangle. Either

conclusion gives a contradiction. □

Claim 12.6. The graph Θ ﬁlls X.

Proof. Suppose not. Fix attention on any component W⊂ Z. Since

Θ does not ﬁll, the previous claim implies that there is a component

γ⊂∂W that is essential and non-peripheral in X. Note that any large

αi meets∂W in at most two points, while any small αi meets∂W in at

most 32 points. Thus |α∩∂W|≤ 256 and the same holds for β. Thus

dX(α,β )≤ 36 by the triangle inequality. As dX(α,β )≥ 37 this is a

contradiction. □

The previous two claims imply:

Claim 12.7. The graph Θ is connected. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 31

There are now two possibilities: either Θ∩ Θ′ is empty or not. In the

ﬁrst case set Σ = Θ and in the second set Σ = Θ ∪ Θ′. By the claims

above, Σ is connected and ﬁlls X. Let R ={Ri} and Q ={Qj} be the

collections of large rectangles.

12.3. Building the I-bundle. We are given Σ, R and Q as above.

Note that R∪Q is an I–bundle and Σ is the component of its horizontal

boundary meeting X. See Figure 6 for a simple case.

Ri

Qj

Figure 6. R∪Q is an I–bundle: all arcs of intersection

are parallel.

Let T0 be a regular neighborhood of R∪Q , taken in V . Again T0

has the structure of an I–bundle. Note that ∂hT0⊂∂V , ∂hT0∩X is a

component of ∂hT0, and this component ﬁlls X due to Claim 12.6. We

will enlarge T0 to obtain the correct I–bundle in V .

Begin by enumerating all annuli{Ai}⊂ ∂vT0 with the property that

some component of ∂Ai is inessential in ∂V . Suppose that we have

built the I–bundle Ti and are now considering the annulus A = Ai.

Let γ∪γ′ =∂A⊂ ∂V with γ inessential in ∂V . Let B⊂ ∂V be the

disk which γ bounds. By induction we assume that no component of

∂hTi is contained in a disk embedded in ∂V (the base case holds by

Claim 12.5). It follows that B∩Ti =∂B =γ. Thus B∪A is isotopic,

rel γ′, to be a properly embedded disk B′⊂ V . As γ′ lies in X or

Y , both incompressible, γ′ must bound a disk C⊂ ∂V . Note that

C∩Ti =∂C =γ′, again using the induction hypothesis.

It follows that B∪A∪C is an embedded two-sphere in V . As V is a

handlebody V is irreducible. Thus B∪A∪C bounds a three-ball Ui in

V . Choose a homeomorphism Ui∼=B×I so that B is identiﬁed with

B×{ 0}, C is identiﬁed with B×{ 1}, and A is identiﬁed with ∂B×I.

We form Ti+1 = Ti∪Ui and note that Ti+1 still has the structure of

an I–bundle. Recalling that A =Ai we have∂vTi+1 =∂vTi∖Ai. Also

32 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

∂hTi+1 =∂hTi∪ (B∪C)⊂∂V . It follows that no component of ∂hTi+1

is contained in a disk embedded in ∂V . Similarly, ∂hTi+1∩X is a

component of ∂hTi+1 and this component ﬁlls X.

After dealing with all of the annuli {Ai} in this fashion we are left

with an I–bundle T . Now all components of ∂∂vT [sic] are essential in

∂V . All of these lying in X are peripheral in X. This is because they

are disjoint from Σ⊂∂hT , which ﬁlls X, by induction. It follows that

the component of ∂hT containing Σ is isotopic to X.

This ﬁnishes the construction of the promised I–bundle T and demon-

strates the ﬁrst two conclusions of Theorem 12.1. For future use we

record:

Remark 12.8. Every curve of ∂∂vT =∂∂hT is essential in S =∂V .

12.4. A vertical annulus parallel into the boundary. Here we

obtain the third conclusion of Theorem 12.1: at least one component of

∂vT is boundary parallel in ∂V .

Fix T an I–bundle with the incompressible hole X a component of

∂hT .

Claim 12.9. All components of ∂vT are incompressible in V .

Proof. Suppose that A⊂∂vT was compressible. By Remark 12.8 we

may compress A to obtain a pair of essential disks B and C. Note that

∂B is isotopic into the complement of ∂hT . So S∖X is compressible,

contradicting Remark 9.1. □

Claim 12.10. Some component of ∂vT is boundary parallel.

Proof. Since ∂vT is incompressible (Claim 12.9) by Remark 8.2, we

ﬁnd that ∂vT is boundary compressible in V . Let B be a boundary

compression for ∂vT . Let A be the component of ∂vT meeting B. Let

α denote the arc A∩B.

The arc α is either essential or inessential in A. Suppose α is inessen-

tial in A. Then α cuts a bigon, C, out of A. Since B was a boundary

compression the disk D =B∪C is essential in V . Since B meets ∂vT

in a single arc, either D⊂ T or D⊂ V ∖T . The former implies that

∂hT is compressible and the latter that X is not a hole. Either gives a

contradiction.

It follows that α is essential in A. Now carefully boundary compress

A: Let N be the closure of a regular neighborhood of B, taken in V ∖A.

Let A′ be the closure of A∖N (so A′ is a rectangle). Let B′∪B′′ be the

closure of fr(N)∖A. Both B′ and B′′ are bigons, parallel to B. Form

D = A′∪B′∪B′′: a properly embedded disk in V . If D is essential

then, as above, either D⊂ T or D⊂ V ∖T . Again, either gives a

contradiction.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 33

It follows that D is inessential in V . Thus D cuts a closed three-ball

U out of V . There are two ﬁnal cases: either N⊂U or N∩U =B′∪B′′.

If U contains N then U contains A. Thus ∂A is contained in the disk

U∩∂V . This contradicts Remark 12.8. Deduce instead that W =U∪N

is a solid torus with meridional disk B. Thus W gives a parallelism

between A and the annulus ∂V∩∂W , as desired. □

Remark 12.11. Similar considerations prove that the multicurve

{∂A|A is a boundary parallel component of ∂vT}

is disk-busting for V .

12.5. Finding a pseudo-Anosov map. Here we prove that the base

surface F of the I–bundle T admits a pseudo-Anosov map.

As in Section 12.2, pick essential disks D′ and E′ in V so that

dX(D′,E′)≥ 61. Lemma 11.4 provides disks D and E which cannot be

boundary compressed into X or into S∖X – thus D and E cannot be

boundary compressed into ∂hT . Also, as above, dX(D,E )≥ 61− 18 =

43.

After isotoping D to minimize intersection with ∂vT it must be the

case that all components of D∩∂vT are essential arcs in ∂vT . By

Lemma 8.5 we conclude that D may be isotoped in V so that D∩T is

vertical in T . The same holds of E. Choose A and B, components of

D∩T and E∩T . Each are vertical rectangles. Since diam X(πX(D))≤ 3

(Lemma 4.4) we now have dX(A,B )≥ 43− 6 = 37.

We now begin to work in the base surface F . Recall that ρF : T→F

is an I–bundle. Take α = ρF (A) and β = ρF (B). Note that the

natural map C(F )→C (X), deﬁned by taking a curve to its lift, is

distance non-increasing (see Equation 6.5). Thus dF (α,β )≥ 37. By

Theorem 10.1 the surface F cannot be an annulus. Thus, by Lemma 2.6

the subsurface F supports a pseudo-Anosov map and we are done.

12.6. Corollaries. We now deal with the possibility of disjoint holes

for the disk complex.

Lemma 12.12. Suppose that X is a large incompressible hole for

D(V ) supported by the I–bundle ρF : T→ F . Let Y = ∂hT ∖X. Let

τ : ∂hT → ∂hT be the involution switching the ends of the I–ﬁbres.

Suppose that D∈D (V ) is an essential disk.

• If F is orientable then dA(F )(D∩X,D∩Y )≤ 6.

• If F is non-orientable then dX(D,Cτ(X))≤ 3.

Proof. By Lemma 11.4 there is a disk D′ ⊂ V which is tight with

respect to ∂hT and which cannot be boundary compressed into ∂hT

34 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

(or into the complement). Also, for any component Z⊂∂hT we have

dA(Z)(D,D′)≤ 3.

Properly isotope D′ to minimize D′∩∂vT . Then D′∩∂vT is properly

isotopic, in ∂vT , to a collection of vertical arcs. Let E⊂D′∩T be a

component. Lemma 8.5 implies that E is vertical in T , after an isotopy

of D′ preserving∂hT setwise. Since E is vertical, the arcs E∩∂hT⊂D′

are τ–invariant. The conclusion follows. □

Recall Lemma 7.3: all holes for the arc complex intersect. This

cannot hold for the disk complex. For example if ρF : T → F is an

I–bundle over an orientable surface then take V =T and notice that

both components of ∂hT are holes for D(V ). However, by the ﬁrst

conclusion of Lemma 12.12, X and Y are paired holes, in the sense of

Deﬁnition 5.5. So, as with the invariant arc complex (Lemma 7.5), all

holes for the disk complex interfere:

Lemma 12.13. Suppose that X,Z ⊂ ∂V are large holes for D(V ).

If X∩Z =∅ then there is an I–bundle T ∼= F×I in V so that

∂hT =X∪Y and Y∩Z̸=∅.

Proof. Suppose that X∩Z =∅. It follows from Remark 9.1 that

both X and Z are incompressible. Let ρF : T→ F be the I–bundle

in V with X⊂ ∂hT , as provided by Theorem 12.1. We also have a

component A⊂∂vT so that A is boundary parallel. Let U be the solid

torus component of V ∖A. Note that Z cannot be contained in ∂U ∖A

because Z is not an annulus (Theorem 10.1).

Let α =ρF (A). Choose any essential arc δ⊂F with both endpoints

in α⊂∂F . It follows that ρ−1

F (δ), together with two meridional disks

of U, forms an essential disk D in V . Let W =∂hT∪ (U ∖A) and note

that ∂D⊂W .

If F is non-orientable then Z∩W =∅ and we have a contradiction.

Deduce that F is orientable. Now, if Z misses Y then Z misses W and

we again have a contradiction. It follows that Z cuts Y and we are

done. □

13. Axioms for combinatorial complexes

The goal of this section and the next is to prove, inductively, an

upper bound on distance in a combinatorial complex G(S) =G. This

section presents our axioms on G: suﬃcient hypotheses for Theorem 13.1.

The axioms, apart from Axiom 13.2, are quite general. Axiom 13.2 is

necessary to prove hyperbolicity and greatly simpliﬁes the recursive

construction in Section 14.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 35

Theorem 13.1. Fix S a compact connected non-simple surface. Sup-

pose that G =G(S) is a combinatorial complex satisfying the axioms

of Section 13. Let X be a hole for G and suppose that αX,βX∈G are

contained in X. For any constant c> 0 there is a constant A satisfying:

dG(αX,βX)≤A

∑

[dY (αX,βX)]c

where the sum is taken over all holes Y⊆X for G.

The proof of the upper bound is more diﬃcult than that of the lower

bound, Theorem 5.10. This is because naturally occurring paths in G

between αX and βX may waste time in non-holes. The ﬁrst example

of this is the path in C(S) obtained by taking the short curves along

a Teichm¨ uller geodesic. The Teichm¨ uller geodesic may spend time

rearranging the geometry of a subsurface. Then the systole path in the

curve complex must be much longer than the curve complex distance

between the endpoints.

In Sections 16, 17, 19 we will verify these axioms for the curve complex

of a non-orientable surface, the arc complex, and the disk complex.

13.1. The axioms. Suppose that G =G(S) is a combinatorial complex.

We begin with the axiom required for hyperbolicity.

Axiom 13.2 (Holes interfere). All large holes for G interfere, as given

in Deﬁnition 5.6.

Fix vertices αX,βX∈G , both contained in a hole X. We are given

Λ ={µn}N

n=0, a path of markings in X.

Axiom 13.3 (Marking path). We require:

(1) The support of µn+1 is contained inside the support of µn.

(2) For any subsurface Y ⊆ X, if πY (µk)̸=∅ then for all n≤ k

the map n↦→πY (µn) is an unparameterized quasi-geodesic with

constants depending only on G.

The second condition is crucial and often technically diﬃcult to obtain.

We are given, for every essential subsurface Y⊂X, a perhaps empty

intervalJY⊂ [0,N ] with the following properties.

Axiom 13.4 (Accessibility). The interval for X is JX = [0,N ]. There

is a constant B3 so that

(1) If m∈JY then Y is contained in the support of µm.

(2) If m∈JY then ι(∂Y,µ m)<B 3.

(3) If [m,n ]∩JY =∅ then dY (µm,µn)<B 3.

36 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

There is a combinatorial path Γ ={γi}K

i=0⊂G starting with αX ending

with βX and each γi is contained in X. There is a strictly increasing

reindexing function r : [0,K ]→ [0,N ] with r(0) = 0 and r(K) =N.

Axiom 13.5 (Combinatorial). There is a constant C2 so that:

• dY (γi,µr(i))<C 2, for every i∈ [0,K ] and every hole Y⊂X,

• dG(γi,γi+1)<C 2, for every i∈ [0,K− 1].

Axiom 13.6 (Replacement). There is a constant C4 so that:

(1) If Y⊂X is a hole and r(i)∈JY then there is a vertex γ′∈G

so that γ′ is contained in Y and dG(γi,γ′)<C 4.

(2) If Z⊂ X is a non-hole and r(i)∈ JZ then there is a vertex

γ′∈G so that dG(γi,γ′)<C 4 and so that γ′ is contained in Z

or in X∖Z.

There is one axiom left: the axiom for straight intervals. This is

given in the next subsection.

13.2. Inductive, electric, shortcut and straight intervals. We

describe subintervals that arise in the partitioning of [0,K ]. As discussed

carefully in Section 13.3, we will choose a lower threshold L1(Y ) for

every essential Y⊂X and a general upper threshold, L2.

Deﬁnition 13.7. Suppose that [i,j ]⊂ [0,K ] is a subinterval of the

combinatorial path. Then [i,j ] is an inductive interval associated to a

hole Y ⊊X if

• r([i,j ])⊂JY (for paired Y we require r([i,j ])⊂JY∩JY ′) and

• dY (γi,γj)≥L1(Y ).

When X is the only relevant hole we have a simpler deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 13.8. Suppose that [i,j ]⊂ [0,K ] is a subinterval of the

combinatorial path. Then [i,j ] is an electric interval if dY (γi,γj)<L 2

for all holes Y ⊊X.

Electric intervals will be further partitioned into shortcut and straight

intervals.

Deﬁnition 13.9. Suppose that [p,q ]⊂ [0,K ] is a subinterval of the

combinatorial path. Then [p,q ] is a shortcut if

• dY (γp,γq)<L 2 for all holes Y , including X itself, and

• there is a non-hole Z⊂X so that r([p,q ])⊂JZ.

Deﬁnition 13.10. Suppose that [p,q ]⊂ [0,K ] is a subinterval of the

combinatorial path and is contained in an electric interval [ i,j ]. Then

[p,q ] is a straight interval if dY (µr(p),µr(q))<L 2 for all non-holes Y .

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 37

Our ﬁnal axiom is:

Axiom 13.11 (Straight). There is a constant A depending only on X

and G so that for every straight interval [p,q ]:

dG(γp,γq)≤AdX(γp,γq)

13.3. Deductions from the axioms. Axiom 13.3 and Lemma 3.9 im-

ply that the reverse triangle inequality holds for projections of marking

paths.

Lemma 13.12. There is a constant C1 so that

dY (µm,µn) +dY (µn,µp)<d Y (µm,µp) +C1

for every essential Y⊂X and for every m<n<p in [0,N ]. □

We record three simple consequences of Axiom 13.4.

Lemma 13.13. There is a constant C3, depending only on B3, with

the follow properties:

(i) If Y is strictly nested in Z and m∈JY then dZ(∂Y,µ m)≤C3.

(ii) IfY is strictly nested in Z then for any m,n∈JY ,dZ(µm,µn)<

C3.

(iii) If Y and Z overlap then for any m,n ∈ JY ∩ JZ we have

dY (µm,µn),dZ(µm,µn)<C 3.

Proof. We ﬁrst prove conclusion (i): Since Y is strictly nested in Z and

since Y is contained in the support of µm (part (1) of Axiom 13.4),

both ∂Y and µm cut Z. By Axiom 13.4, part (2), we have that

ι(∂Y,µ m)≤B3. It follows that ι(∂Y,π Z(µm))≤ 2B3. By Lemma 2.2

we deduce that dZ(∂Y,µ m)≤ 2 log2B3 + 3. We takeC3 larger than this

right hand side.

Conclusion (ii) follows from a pair of applications of conclusion (i)

and the triangle inequality.

For conclusion (iii): As in (ii), to bound dZ(µm,µn) it suﬃces to note

that ∂Y cuts Z and that ∂Y has bounded intersection with both of

µm,µn. □

We now have all of the constants C1,C 3,C 2,C 4 in hand. Recall that

L4 is the pairing constant of Deﬁnition 5.5 and that M0 is the constant

of 4.6. We must choose a lower threshold L1(Y ) for every essential

Y ⊂ X. We must also choose the general upper threshold, L2 and

general lower thresholdL0. We require, for all essential Z,Y in X, with

38 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

ξ(Z)<ξ (Y )≤ξ(X):

L0 >C 3 + 2C2 + 2L4(13.14)

L2 >L 1(X) + 2L4 + 6C1 + 2C2 + 14C3 + 10 (13.15)

L1(Y )>M 0 + 2C3 + 4C2 + 2L4 +L0(13.16)

L1(X)>L 1(Z) + 2C3 + 4C2 + 4L4(13.17)

14. Partition and the upper bound on distance

In this section we prove Theorem 13.1 by induction on ξ(X). The ﬁrst

stage of the proof is to describe the inductive partition: we partition the

given interval [0,K ] into inductive and electric intervals. The inductive

partition is closely linked with the hierarchy machine [ 25] and with the

notion of antichains introduced in [34].

We next give the electric partition: each electric interval is divided

into straight and shortcut intervals. Note that the electric partition

also gives the base case of the induction. We ﬁnally bound dG(αX,βX)

from above by combining the contributions from the various intervals.

14.1. Inductive partition. We begin by identifying the relevant sur-

faces for the construction of the partition. We are given a hole X for G

and vertices αX,βX∈G contained in X. Deﬁne

BX ={Y ⊊X|Y is a hole and dY (αX,βX)≥L1(X)}.

For any subinterval [i,j ]⊂ [0,K ] deﬁne

BX(i,j ) ={Y∈BX|dY (γi,γj)≥L1(X)}.

We now partition [0,K ] into inductive and electric intervals. Begin

with the partition of one part PX ={[0,K ]}. Recursively PX is a

partition of [0,K ] consisting of intervals which are either inductive,

electric, or undetermined. Suppose that [ i,j ]∈P X is undetermined.

Claim. If BX(i,j ) is empty then [i,j ] is electric.

Proof. SinceBX(i,j ) is empty, every hole Y ⊊X has eitherd Y (γi,γj)<

L1(X) or Y /∈BX. In the former case, as L1(X)<L 2, we are done.

So suppose the latter holds. Now, by the reverse triangle inequality

(Lemma 13.12),

dY (µr(i),µr(j))<d Y (µ0,µN) + 2C1.

Since r(0) = 0 and r(K) =N we ﬁnd:

dY (γi,γj)<d Y (αX,βX) + 2C1 + 4C2.

Deduce that

dY (γi,γj)<L 1(X) + 2C1 + 4C2 <L 2.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 39

This completes the proof. □

Thus ifBX(i,j ) is empty then [i,j ]∈P X is determined to be electric.

Proceed on to the next undetermined element. Suppose instead that

BX(i,j ) is non-empty. Pick a hole Y∈BX(i,j ) so that Y has maximal

ξ(Y ) amongst the elements of BX(i,j )

Let p,q ∈ [i,j ] be the ﬁrst and last indices, respectively, so that

r(p),r (q)∈JY . (If Y is paired with Y′ then we take the ﬁrst and last

indices that, after reindexing, lie inside of JY∩JY ′.)

Claim. The indices p,q are well-deﬁned.

Proof. By assumption dY (γi,γj)≥L1(X). By Equation 13.14,

L1(X)>C 3 + 2C2.

We deduce from Axiom 13.4 and Axiom 13.5 that JY ∩ r([i,j ]) is

non-empty. Thus, if Y is not paired, the indices p,q are well-deﬁned.

Suppose instead that Y is paired with Y′. Recall that measurements

made in Y and Y′ diﬀer by at most the pairing constant L4 given in

Deﬁnition 5.5. By (13.16),

L1(X)>C 3 + 2C2 + 2L4.

We deduce again from Axiom 13.4 that JY ′∩r([i,j ]) is non-empty.

Suppose now, for a contradiction, that JY∩JY ′∩r([i,j ]) is empty.

Deﬁne

h = max{ℓ∈ [i,j ]|r(ℓ)∈JY}, k = min{ℓ∈ [i,j ]|r(ℓ)∈JY ′}

Without loss of generality we may assume that h<k . It follows that

dY ′(γi,γh)< C3 + 2C2. Thus dY (γi,γh)< C3 + 2C2 + 2L4. Similarly,

dY (γh,γj)<C 3 + 2C2. Deduce

dY (γi,γj)< 2C3 + 4C2 + 2L4 <L 1(X),

the last inequality by (13.16). This is a contradiction to the assumption.

□

Claim. The interval [p,q ] is inductive for Y .

Proof. We must check that dY (γp,γq)≥L1(Y ). Suppose ﬁrst that Y is

not paired. Then by the deﬁnition of p,q , (2) of Axiom 13.4, and the

triangle inequality we have

dY (µr(i),µr(j))≤dY (µr(p),µr(q)) + 2C3.

Thus by Axiom 13.5,

dY (γi,γj)≤dY (γp,γq) + 2C3 + 4C2.

40 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Since by (13.17),

L1(Y ) + 2C3 + 4C2 <L 1(X)≤dY (γi,γj)

we are done.

When Y is paired the proof is similar but we must use the slightly

stronger inequality L1(Y ) + 2C3 + 4C2 + 4L4 <L 1(X). □

Thus, when BX(i,j ) is non-empty we may ﬁnd a hole Y and indices

p,q as above. In this situation, we subdivide the element [i,j ]∈P X into

the elements [i,p− 1], [p,q ], and [q + 1,j ]. (The ﬁrst or third intervals,

or both, may be empty.) The interval [p,q ]∈P X is determined to be

inductive and associated to Y . Proceed on to the next undetermined

element. This completes the construction of PX.

As a bit of notation, if [ i,j ]∈P X is associated to Y ⊂ X we will

sometimes write IY = [i,j ].

14.2. Properties of the inductive partition.

Lemma 14.1. Suppose that Y,Z are holes and IZ is an inductive

element ofPX associated to Z. Suppose that r(IZ)⊂JY (or r(IZ)⊂

JY∩JY ′, if Y is paired). Then

• Z is nested in Y or

• Z and Z′ are paired and Z′ is nested in Y .

Proof. LetIZ = [i,j ]. Suppose ﬁrst that Y is strictly nested in Z. Then

by (ii) of Lemma 13.13, dZ(µr(i),µr(j))<C 3. Then by Axiom 13.5

dZ(γi,γj)<C 3 + 2C2 <L 1(Z),

a contradiction. We reach the same contradiction if Y and Z overlap

using (iii) of Lemma 13.13.

Now, if Z and Y are disjoint then there are two cases: Suppose ﬁrst

that Y is paired with Y′. Since all holes interfere, Y′ and Z must meet.

In this case we are done, just as in the previous paragraph.

Suppose now that Z is paired with Z′. Since all holes interfere, Z′

and Y must meet. If Z′ is nested in Y then we are done. If Y is strictly

nested in Z′ then, as r([i,j ])⊂JY , we ﬁnd that as above by Axioms

13.5 and (ii) of Lemma 13.13 that

dZ′(γi,γj)<C 3 + 2C2

and so dZ(γi,γj)<C 3 + 2C2 + 2L4 <L 1(Z), a contradiction. We reach

the same contradiction if Y and Z′ overlap. □

Proposition 14.2. Suppose Y ⊊X is a hole for G.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 41

(1) If Y is associated to an inductive interval IY ∈P X and Y is

paired with Y′ then Y′ is not associated to any inductive interval

inPX.

(2) There is at most one inductive interval IY∈P X associated to

Y .

(3) There are at most two holes Z and W , distinct from Y (and

from Y′, if Y is paired) such that

• there are inductive intervals IZ = [h,i ] and IW = [j,k ] and

• dY (γh,γi),dY (γj,γk)≥L0.

Remark 14.3. It follows that for any hole Y there are at most three

inductive intervals in the partitionPX where Y has projection distance

greater than L0.

Proof of Proposition 14.2. To prove the ﬁrst claim: Suppose that IY =

[p,q ] andIY ′ = [p′,q′] withq <p′. It follows that [r(p),r (q′)]⊂JY∩JY ′.

If q + 1 =p′ then the partition would have chosen a larger inductive

interval for one of Y or Y′. It must be the case that there is an inductive

intervalIZ⊂ [q + 1,p′− 1] for some hole Z, distinct from Y and Y′,

with ξ(Z)≥ξ(Y ). However, by Lemma 14.1 we ﬁnd that Z is nested

in Y or in Y′. It follows that Z =Y or Y , a contradiction.

The second statement is essentially similar.

Finally suppose that Z and W are the ﬁrst and last holes, if any,

satisfying the hypotheses of the third claim. Since dY (γh,γi)≥L0 we

ﬁnd by Axiom 13.5 that

dY (µr(h),µr(i))≥L0− 2C2.

By (13.14), L0− 2C2 >C 3 so that

JY∩r(IZ)̸=∅.

If Y is paired then, again by (13.14) we have L0 > C3 + 2C2 + 2L4,

we also ﬁnd that JY ′∩r(IZ)̸=∅. Symmetrically, JY∩r(IW ) (and

JY ′∩r(IW )) are also non-empty.

It follows that the interval between IZ and IW , after reindexing, is

contained inJY (andJY ′, if Y is paired). Thus for any inductive interval

IV = [p,q ] between IZ and IW the associated hole V is nested in Y

(or V′ is nested in Y ), by Lemma 14.1. If V =Y or V =Y′ there is

nothing to prove. Suppose instead that V (or V′) is strictly nested in

Y . It follows that

dY (γp,γq)<C 3 + 2C2 <L 0.

Thus there are no inductive intervals between IZ and IW satisfying the

hypotheses of the third claim. □

42 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

The following lemma and proposition bound the number of inductive

intervals. The discussion here is very similar to (and in fact inspired)

the antichains deﬁned in [34, Section 5]. Our situation is complicated

by the presence of non-holes and interfering holes.

Lemma 14.4. Suppose that X,αX,βX are given, as above. For any

ℓ≥ (3·L2)ξ(X), if{Yi}ℓ

i=1 is a collection of distinct strict sub-holes of X

each having dYi(αX,βX)≥L1(X) then there is a hole Z⊆X such that

dZ(αX,βX)≥L2− 1 and Z contains at least L2 of the Yi. Furthermore,

for at least L2− 4(C1 +C3 + 2C3 + 2) of these Yi we ﬁnd that JYi ⊊JZ.

(If Z is paired then JYi ⊊JZ∩JZ′.) Each of these Yi is disjoint from a

distinct vertex ηi∈ [πZ(αX),πZ(βX)].

Proof. Let gX be a geodesic in C(X) joining αX,βX. By the Bounded

Geodesic Image Theorem (Theorem 4.6), sinceL1(X)>M 0, for everyYi

there is a vertex ωi∈gX such that Yi⊂X∖ωi. Thus dX(ωi,∂Yi)≤ 1.

If there are at least L2 distinct ωi, associated to distinct Yi, then

dX(αX,βX)≥ L2− 1. In this situation we take Z = X. Since JX =

[0,N ] we are done.

Thus assume there do not exist at least L2 distinct ωi. Then there is

some ﬁxed ω among these ωi such that at least ℓ

L2

≥ 3(3·L2)ξ(X)−1 of

the Yi satisfy

Yi⊂ (X∖ω).

Thus one component, call it W , of X∖ω contains at least (3·L2)ξ(X)−1

of the Yi. Let gW be a geodesic in C(W ) joining αW = πW (αX) and

βW =πW (βX). Notice that

dYi(αW,βW )≥dYi(αX,βX)− 8

because we are projecting to nested subsurfaces. This follows for

example from Lemma 4.4. Hence dYi(αW,βW )≥L1(W ).

Again apply Theorem 4.6. Since L1(W )>M 0, for every remaining

Yi there is a vertex ηi∈gW such that

Yi⊂ (W ∖ηi)

If there are at least L2 distinct ηi then we take Z =W . Otherwise we

repeat the argument. Since the complexity of each successive subsurface

is decreasing by at least 1, we must eventually ﬁnd the desired Z

containing at least L2 of the Yi, each disjoint from distinct vertices of

gZ.

So suppose that there are at least L2 distinct ηi associated to distinct

Yi and we have taken Z =W . Now we must ﬁnd at least L2− 4(C1 +

C3 + 2C3 + 2) of these Yi where JYi ⊊JZ.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 43

To this end we focus attention on a small subset{Yj}5

j=1⊂{Yi}. Let

ηj be the vertex of gZ =gW associated to Yj. We choose these Yj so

that

• the ηj are arranged along gZ in order of index and

• dZ(ηj,ηj+1)>C 1 +C3 + 2C3 + 2, for j = 1, 2, 3, 4.

This is possible by (13.15) because

L2 > 4(C1 +C3 + 2C3).

Set Jj =JYj and pick any indices mj∈Jj. (If Z is paired then Yj is

as well and we pick mj∈ JYj∩J(Yj )′.) We use µ(mj) to denote µmj.

Since ∂Y j is disjoint from ηj, Axiom 13.4 and Lemma 2.2 imply

(14.5) dZ(µ(mj),ηj)≤C3 + 1.

Since the sequence πZ(µn) satisﬁes the reverse triangle inequality

(Lemma 13.12), it follows that the mj appear in [0,N ] in order agreeing

with their index. The triangle inequality implies that

dZ(µ(m1),µ (m2))>C 3.

Thus Axiom 13.4 implies that JZ∩ [m1,m 2] is non-empty. Similarly,

JZ∩ [m4,m 5] is non-empty. It follows that [ m2,m 4]⊂ JZ. (If Z is

paired then, after applying the symmetry τ to gZ, the same argument

proves [m2,m 4]⊂JZ′.)

Notice that J2∩J3 =∅. For if m∈ J2∩J3 then by (14.5) both

dZ(µm,η 2) and dZ(µm,η 3) are bounded by C3 + 1. It follows that

dZ(η2,η 3)< 2C3 + 2,

a contradiction. Similarly J3∩J4 =∅. We deduce that J3 ⊊ [m2,m 4]⊂

JZ. (If Z is paired J3⊂JZ∩JZ′.) Finally, there are at least

L2− 4(C1 +C3 + 2C3 + 2)

possible Yi’s which satisfy the hypothesis on Y 3. This completes the

proof. □

Deﬁne

Pind ={I∈P X| I is inductive}.

Proposition 14.6. The number of inductive intervals is a lower bound

for the projection distance in X:

dX(αX,βX)≥ |Pind|

2(3·L2)ξ(X)−1 + 1− 1.

44 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Proof. Suppose, for a contradiction, that the conclusion fails. Let

gX be a geodesic in C(X) connecting αX to βX. Then, as in the

proof of Lemma 14.4, there is a vertex ω of gX and a component

W⊂X∖ω where at least (3·L2)ξ(X)−1 of the inductive intervals in IX

have associated surfaces, Yi, contained in W .

Since ξ(X)− 1≥ξ(W ) we may apply Lemma 14.4 inside of W . So

we ﬁnd a surface Z⊆W ⊊X so that

• Z contains at least L2 of the Yi,

• dZ(αX,βX)≥L2, and

• there are at least L2− 4(C1 +C3 + 2C3 + 2) of the Yi where

JYi ⊊JZ.

Since Yi ⊊ Z and Yi is a hole, Z is also a hole. Since L2 > L1(X) it

follows that Z∈BX. Let Y ={Yi} be the set of Yi satisfying the third

bullet. Let Y 1∈Y and η1∈ gZ satisfy ∂Y 1∩η1 =∅ and η1 is the

ﬁrst such. Choose Y 2 and η2 similarly, so that η2 is the last such. By

Lemma 14.4

(14.7) dZ(η1,η 2)≥L2− 4(C1 +C3 + 2C3 + 2).

Let p = minIY 1 and q = maxIY 2. Note that [ p,q ]⊂ JZ. (If Z is

paired with Z′ then [p,q ]⊂JZ∩JZ′.) Again by (1) of Axiom 13.4, and

Lemma 2.2,

dZ(µr(p),∂Y 1)<C 3.

It follows that

dZ(µr(p),η 1)≤C3 + 1

and the same bound applies to dZ(µr(q),η 2). Combined with (14.7) we

ﬁnd that

dZ(µr(p),µr(q))≥L2− 4C1− 4C3− 10C3− 10.

By the reverse triangle inequality (Lemma 13.12), for any p′≤p,q≤q′,

dZ(µr(p′),µr(q′))≥L2− 6C1− 4C3− 10C3− 10.

Finally by Axiom 13.5 and the above inequality we have

dZ(γp′,γq′)≥L2− 6C1− 4C3− 10C3− 10− 2C2.

By (13.15) the right-hand side is greater thanL1(X)+2L4 so we deduce

that Z∈BX(p′,q′), for any such p′,q′. (When Z is paired deduce also

that Z′∈BX(p′,q′).)

Let IV be the ﬁrst inductive interval chosen by the procedure with

the property that IV∩ [p,q ]̸=∅. Note that, since IY 1 and IY 2 will also

be chosen, IV⊂ [p,q ]. Let p′,q′ be the indices so that V is chosen from

BX(p′,q′). Thus p′≤ p and q≤ q′. However, since IV ⊂ [p,q ]⊂ JZ,

Lemma 14.1 implies that V is strictly nested in Z. (When pairing

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 45

occurs we may ﬁnd instead that V⊂Z′ or V′⊂Z.) Thus ξ(Z)>ξ (V )

and we ﬁnd that Z would be chosen from BX(p′,q′), instead of V . This

is a contradiction. □

14.3. Electric partition. The goal of this subsection is to prove:

Proposition 14.8. There is a constant A depending only on ξ(X), so

that: if [i,j ]⊂ [0,K ] is a electric interval then

dG(γi,γj)≤AdX(γi,γj).

We begin by building a partition of [i,j ] into straight and shortcut

intervals. Deﬁne

CX ={Y ⊊X|Y is a non-hole and dY (µr(i),µr(j))≥L1(X)}.

We also deﬁne, for all [p,q ]⊂ [i,j ]

CX(p,q ) ={Y∈CX|JY∩ [r(p),r (q)]̸=∅}.

Our recursion starts with the partition of one part, P(i,j ) ={[i,j ]}.

Recursively P(i,j ) is a partition of [ i,j ] into shortcut, straight, or

undetermined intervals. Suppose that [p,q ]∈P (i,j ) is undetermined.

Claim. If CX(p,q ) is empty then [p,q ] is straight.

Proof. We show the contrapositive. Suppose that Y is a non-hole

with dY (µr(p),µr(q))≥ L2. Since L2 > C3, Axiom 13.4 implies that

JY∩ [r(p),r (q)] is non-empty. Also, the reverse triangle inequality

(Lemma 13.12) gives:

dY (µr(p),µr(q))<d Y (µr(i),µr(j)) + 2C1.

Since L2 > L1(X) + 2C1, we ﬁnd that Y ∈ CX. It follows that

Y∈CX(p,q ). □

So when CX(p,q ) is empty the interval [ p,q ] is determined to be

straight. Proceed onto the next undetermined element of P(i,j ). Now

suppose that CX(p,q ) is non-empty. Then we choose any Y∈CX(p,q )

so that Y has maximal ξ(Y ) amongst the elements of CX(p,q ). Notice

that by the accessibility requirement that JY∩ [r(p),r (q)] is non-empty.

There are two cases. If JY∩r([p,q ]) is empty then let p′∈ [p,q ] be

the largest integer so that r(p′)< minJY . Note that p′ is well-deﬁned.

Now divide the interval [p,q ] into the two undetermined intervals [p,p′],

[p′ + 1,q ]. In this situation we say Y is associated to a shortcut of length

one and we add the element [p′ + 1

2] to P(i,j ).

Next suppose that JY∩r([p,q ]) is non-empty. Let p′,q′∈ [p,q ] be the

ﬁrst and last indices, respectively, so thatr(p′),r (q′)∈JY . (Note that it

is possible to havep′ =q′.) Partition [p,q ] = [p,p′−1]∪[p′,q′]∪[q′+1,q ].

46 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

The ﬁrst and third parts are undetermined; either may be empty. This

completes the recursive construction of the partition.

Deﬁne

Pshort ={I∈P (i,j )|I is a shortcut}

and

Pstr ={I∈P (i,j )|I is straight}.

Proposition 14.9. With P(i,j ) as deﬁned above,

dX(γi,γj)≥ |Pshort|

2(3·L2)ξ(X)−1 + 1− 1.

Proof. The proof is identical to that of Proposition 14.6 with the caveat

that in Lemma 14.4 we must use the markings µr(i) and µr(j) instead of

the endpoints γi and γj. □

Now we “electrify” every shortcut interval using Theorem 13.1 recur-

sively.

Lemma 14.10. There is a constant L3 =L3(X,G), so that for every

shortcut interval [p,q ] we have dG(γp,γq)<L 3.

Proof. As [p,q ] is a shortcut we are given a non-hole Z⊂ X so that

r([p,q ])⊂JZ. Let Y =X∖Z. Thus Axiom 13.6 gives vertices γ′

p,γ′

q of

G lying in Y or in Z, so that dG(γp,γ′

p),dG(γq,γ′

q)≤C4.

If one of γ′

p,γ′

q lies in Y while the other lies in Z then

dG(γp,γq)< 2C4 + 1.

If both lie in Z then, as Z is a non-hole, there is a vertex δ∈G (S)

disjoint from both of γ′

p and γ′

q and we have

dG(γp,γq)< 2C4 + 2.

If both lie in Y then there are two cases. If Y is not a hole for G(S)

then we are done as in the previous case. If Y is a hole then by the

deﬁnition of shortcut interval, Lemma 5.7, and the triangle inequality

we have

dW (γ′

p,γ′

q)< 6 + 6C4 +L2

for all holes W⊂Y . Notice that Y is strictly contained in X. Thus we

may inductively apply Theorem 13.1 with c = 6 + 6C4 +L2. We deduce

that all terms on the right-hand side of the distance estimate vanish

and thus dG(γ′

p,γ′

q) is bounded by a constant depending only on X and

G. The same then holds for dG(γp,γq) and we are done. □

We are now equipped to give:

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 47

Proof of Proposition 14.8. Suppose that P(i,j ) is the given partition

of the electric interval [i,j ] into straight and shortcut subintervals. As

a bit of notation, if [p,q ] =I∈P (i,j ), we take dG(I) =dG(γp,γq) and

dX(I) =dX(γp,γq). Applying Axiom 13.5 we have

dG(γi,γj)≤

∑

I∈Pstr

dG(I) +

∑

I∈Pshort

dG(I) +C2|P(i,j )|(14.11)

The last term arises from connecting left endpoints of intervals with

right endpoints. We must bound the three terms on the right.

We begin with the third; recall that |P(i,j )| =|Pshort| +|Pstr|, that

|Pstr|≤|P short|+1, and that|Pshort|≤AdX(γi,γj). The second inequality

follows from the construction of the partition while the last is implied

by Proposition 14.9. Thus the third term of Equation 14.11 is quasi-

bounded above by dX(γi,γj).

By Lemma 14.10, the second term of Equation 14.11 at mostL3|Pshort|.

Finally, by Axiom 13.11, for all I∈P str we have

dG(I)≤AdX(I),

Also, it follows from the reverse triangle inequality (Lemma 13.12) that

∑

I∈Pstr

dX(I)≤dX(γi,γj) + (2C1 + 2C2)|Pstr| + 2C2.

We deduce that ∑

I∈Pstrd G(I) is also quasi-bounded above by dX(γi,γj).

Thus for a somewhat larger value of A we ﬁnd

dG(γi,γj)≤AdX(γi,γj).

This completes the proof. □

14.4. The upper bound. We will need:

Proposition 14.12. For any c > 0 there is a constant A with the

following property. Suppose that [i,j ] =IY is an inductive interval in

PX. Then we have:

dG(γi,γj)≤A

∑

Z

[dZ(γi,γj)]c

where Z ranges over all holes for G contained in X.

Proof. Axiom 13.6 gives vertices γ′

i, γ′

j∈G , contained in Y , so that

dG(γi,γ′

i)≤C4 and the same holds for j. Since projection to holes is

coarsely Lipschitz (Lemma 5.7) for any hole Z we have dZ(γi,γ′

i)≤

3 + 3C3.

Fix any c> 0. Now, since

dG(γi,γj)≤dG(γ′

i,γ′

j) + 2C3

48 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

to ﬁnd the required constant A it suﬃces to bound dG(γ′

i,γ′

j). Let

c′ =c + 6C3 + 6. Since Y ⊊X, induction gives us a constant A so that

dG(γ′

i,γ′

j)≤A

∑

Z

[dZ(γ′

i,γ′

j)]c′

≤

∑

Z

[dZ(γi,γj) + 6C3 + 6]c′

< (6C3 + 6)N +

∑

Z

[dZ(γi,γj)]c

where N is the number of non-zero terms in the ﬁnal sum. Also, the

sum ranges over sub-holes of Y . We may take A somewhat larger to

deal with the term (6C3 + 6)N and include all holes Z⊂X to ﬁnd

dG(γi,γj)≤A

∑

Z

[dZ(γi,γj)]c

where the sum is over all holes Z⊂X. □

14.5. Finishing the proof. Now we may ﬁnish the proof of Theo-

rem 13.1. Fix any constant c≥ 0. Suppose that X, αX, βX are given

as above. Suppose that Γ = {γi}K

i=0 is the given combinatorial path

andPX is the partition of [0,K ] into inductive and electric intervals.

So we have:

dG(αX,βX)≤

∑

I∈Pind

dG(I) +

∑

I∈Pele

dG(I) +C2|PX|(14.13)

Again, the last term arises from adjacent right and left endpoints of

diﬀerent intervals.

We must bound the terms on the right-hand side; begin by noticing

that|PX| =|Pind| +|Pele|,|Pele|≤|P ind| + 1 and|Pind|≤AdX(αX,βX).

The second inequality follows from the way the partition is constructed

and the last follows from Proposition 14.6. Thus the third term of

Equation 14.13 is quasi-bounded above by dX(αX,βX).

Next consider the second term of Equation 14.13:

∑

I∈Pele

dG(I)≤A

∑

I∈Pele

dX(I)

≤dX(αX,βX) + (2C1 + 2C2)|Pele| + 2C2

with the ﬁrst inequality following from Proposition 14.8 and the second

from the reverse triangle inequality (Lemma 13.12).

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 49

Finally we bound the ﬁrst term of Equation 14.13. Let c′ =c +L0.

Thus,

∑

I∈Pind

dG(I)≤

∑

IY∈Pind

(

A′

Y

(∑

Z⊊Y

[dZ(IY )]c′

)

+A′

Y

)

≤A′′

( ∑

I∈Pind

∑

Z⊊X

[dZ(I)]c′

)

+A′′·|P ind|

≤A′′

( ∑

Z⊊X

∑

I∈Pind

[dZ(I)]c′

)

+A′′·|P ind|

Here A′

Y and the ﬁrst inequality are given by Proposition 14.12. Also

A′′ = max{A′

Y |Y ⊊ X}. In the last line, each sum of the form∑

I∈Pind

[dZ(I)]c′ has at most three terms, by Remark 14.3 and the fact

that c′ > L0. For the moment, ﬁx a hole Z and any three elements

I,I′,I′′∈P ind.

By the reverse triangle inequality (Lemma 13.12) we ﬁnd that

dZ(I) +dZ(I′) +dZ(I′′)<d Z(αX,βX) + 6C1 + 8C2

which in turn is less than dZ(αX,βX) +L0.

It follows that

[dZ(I)]c′ + [dZ(I′)]c′ + [dZ(I′′)]c′ < [dZ(αX,βX)]c +L0.

Thus,

∑

Z⊊X

∑

I∈Pind

[dZ(I)]c′≤L0·N +

∑

Z⊊X

[dZ(αX,βX)]c

where N is the number of non-zero terms in the ﬁnal sum. Also, the

sum ranges over all holes Z ⊊X.

Combining the above inequalities, and increasing A once again, im-

plies that

dG(αX,βX)≤A

∑

Z

[dZ(αX,βX)]c

where the sum ranges over all holes Z⊆X. This completes the proof

of Theorem 13.1. □

15. Background on Teichm ¨uller space

Our goal in Sections 16, 17 and 19 will be to verify the axioms stated

in Section 13 for the complex of curves of a non-orientable surface, for

the arc complex, and for the disk complex. Here we give the necessary

background on Teichm¨ uller space.

50 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Fix now a surface S = Sg,n of genus g with n punctures. Two

conformal structures on S are equivalent, written Σ∼ Σ′, if there is

a conformal map f : Σ→ Σ′ which is isotopic to the identity. Let

T =T (S) be the Teichm¨ uller spaceof S; the set of equivalence classes

of conformal structures Σ on S.

Deﬁne the Teichm¨ uller metric by,

dT (Σ, Σ′) = inf

f

{1

2 log K(f)

}

where the inﬁmum ranges over all quasiconformal maps f : Σ→ Σ′

isotopic to the identity and where K(f) is the maximal dilatation of f.

Recall that the inﬁmum is realized by a Teichm¨ uller map that, in turn,

may be deﬁned in terms of a quadratic diﬀerential.

15.1. Quadratic diﬀerentials.

Deﬁnition 15.1. A quadratic diﬀerentialq(z)dz2 on Σ is an assignment

of a holomorphic function to each coordinate chart that is a disk and

of a meromorphic function to each chart that is a punctured disk. If z

and ζ are overlapping charts then we require

qz(z) =qζ(ζ)

(dζ

dz

)2

in the intersection of the charts. The meromorphic function qz(z) has

at most a simple pole at the puncture z = 0.

At any point away from the zeroes and poles of q there is a natural

coordinate z =x +iy with the property that qz≡ 1. In this natural

coordinate the foliation by lines y =c is called the horizontal foliation.

The foliation by lines x =c is called the vertical foliation.

Now ﬁx a quadratic diﬀerential q on Σ = Σ 0. Let x,y be natural

coordinates forq. For every t∈ R we obtain a new quadratic diﬀerential

qt with coordinates

xt =etx, y t =e−ty.

Also, qt determines a conformal structure Σ t on S. The map t↦→ Σt is

the Teichm¨ uller geodesic determined by Σ andq.

15.2. Marking coming from a Teichm¨ uller geodesic. Suppose

that Σ is a Riemann surface structure on S and σ is the uniformizing

hyperbolic metric in the conformal class of Σ. In a slight abuse of

terminology, we call the collection of shortest simple non-peripheral

closed geodesics the systoles of σ. Fix a constant ϵ smaller than the

Margulis constant. The ϵ–thick part of Teichm¨ uller space consists of

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 51

those Riemann surfaces such that the hyperbolic systole has length at

least ϵ.

We deﬁne P = P (σ), a Bers pants decomposition of S, as follows:

pick α1, any systole for σ. Deﬁne αi to be any systole of σ restricted

to S∖(α1∪... ∪αi−1). Continue in this fashion until P is a pants

decomposition. Note that any curve with length less than the Margulis

constant will necessarily be an element of P .

Suppose that Σ , Σ′ ∈ T(S). Suppose that P,P′ are Bers pants

decompositions with respect to Σ and Σ′. Suppose also that dT (Σ, Σ′)≤

1. Then the curves in P have uniformly bounded lengths in Σ ′ and

conversely. By the Collar Lemma, the intersection ι(P,P′) is bounded,

solely in terms of ξ(S).

Suppose now that {Σt|t∈ [−M,M ]} is the Teichm¨ uller geodesic

deﬁned by the quadratic diﬀerentialsqt. Let σt be the hyperbolic metric

uniformizing Σt. Let Pt =P (σt) be a Bers pants decomposition.

We now ﬁnd transversals in order to complete Pt to a Bers marking

νt. Suppose that Pt ={αi}. For each i, let Ai be the annular cover of

S corresponding to αi. Note that qt lifts to a singular Euclidean metric

qi

t on Ai. Let αi be a geodesic representative of the core curve of Ai

with respect to the metric qi

t. Choose γi∈C (Ai) to be any geodesic arc,

also with respect to qi

t, that is perpendicular to αi. Let βi be any curve

in S∖({αj}j̸=i) which meets αi minimally and so that dAi(βi,γi)≤ 3.

(See the discussion after the proof of Lemma 2.4 in [ 25].) Doing this for

eachi gives a complete clean marking νt ={αi}∪{ βi}.

We now have:

Lemma 15.2. [33, Remark 6.2 and Equation (3)] There is a constant

B0 =B0(S) with the following property. For any Teichm¨ uller geodesic

and for any time t, there is a constant δ >0 so that if |t−s|≤ δ then

ι(νt,νs)<B 0.

Suppose that Σt and Σs are surfaces in the ϵ–thick part of T (S). We

takeB0 suﬃciently large so that if ι(νt,νs)≥B0 then dT (Σt, Σs)≥ 1.

15.3. The marking axiom. We construct a sequence of markings µn,

for n∈ [0,N ]⊂ N, as follows. Take µ0 = ν−M. Now suppose that

µn =νt is deﬁned. Let s>t be the ﬁrst time that there is a marking

with ι(νt,νs)≥B0, if such a time exists. If so, let µn+1 =νs. If no such

time exists take N =n and we are done.

We now show that µn =νt and µn+1 =νs have bounded intersection.

By the above lemma there is a marking νr with t≤r <s and

ι(νr,νs)≤B0.

52 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

By construction

ι(νt,νr)<B 0.

Since intersection number bounds distance in the marking complex we

ﬁnd that by the triangle inequality, νt and νs are bounded distance in

the marking complex. Conversely, since distance bounds intersection

in the marking complex we ﬁnd that ι(µn,µn+1) is bounded. It follows

that dY (µn,µn+1) is uniformly bounded, independent of Y⊂S and of

n∈ [0,N ].

It now follows from Theorem 6.1 of [ 33] that, for any subsurface

Y ⊂ S, the sequence {πY (µn)}⊂C (Y ) is an unparameterized quasi-

geodesic. Thus the marking path {µn} satisﬁes the second requirement

of Axiom 13.3. The ﬁrst requirement is trivial as every µn ﬁlls S.

15.4. The accessibility axiom. We now turn to Axiom 13.4. Since

µn ﬁlls S for every n, the ﬁrst requirement is a triviality.

In Section 5 of [ 33] Raﬁ deﬁnes, for every subsurface Y ⊂ S, an

interval of isolation IY inside of the parameterizing interval of the

Teichm¨ uller geodesic. Note thatIY is deﬁned purely in terms of the

geometry of the given quadratic diﬀerentials. Further, for all t∈ IY

and for all components α⊂∂Y the hyperbolic length of α in Σt is less

than the Margulis constant. Furthermore, by Theorem 5.3 [ 33], there is

a constant B3 so that if [s,t ]∩IY =∅ then

dY (νs,νt)≤B3.

So deﬁne JY⊂ [0,N ] to be the subinterval of the marking path where

the time corresponding to µn lies in IY . The third requirement fol-

lows. Finally, if m∈ JY then ∂Y is contained in base(µm) and thus

ι(∂Y,µ m)≤ 2·|∂Y|.

15.5. The distance estimate in Teichm¨ uller space.We end this

section by quoting another result of Raﬁ:

Theorem 15.3. [33, Theorem 2.4] Fix a surface S and a constant

ϵ> 0. There is a constant C0 =C0(S,ϵ ) so that for any c>C 0 there

is a constant A with the following property. Suppose that Σ and Σ′ lie

in the ϵ–thick part of T (S). Then

dT (Σ, Σ′) =A

∑

X

[dX(µ,µ′)]c +

∑

α

[logd α(µ,µ′)]c

where µ and µ′ are Bers markings on Σ and Σ′, Y ⊂ S ranges over

non-annular surfaces and α ranges over vertices of C(S). □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 53

16. Paths for the non-orientable surface

Fix F a compact, connected, and non-orientable surface. Let S

be the orientation double cover with covering map ρF : S→ F . Let

τ : S→S be the associated involution. Note that C(F ) =Cτ(S). Let

Cτ(S)→C (S) be the relation sending a symmetric multicurve to its

components.

Our goal for this section is to prove Lemma 16.4, the classiﬁcation

of holes for C(F ). As remarked above, Lemma 6.3 and Corollary 6.4

follow, proving the hyperbolicity of C(F ).

16.1. The marking path. We will use the extreme rigidity of Te-

ichm¨ uller geodesics to ﬁnd τ–invariant marking paths. We ﬁrst show

that τ–invariant Bers pants decompositions exist.

Lemma 16.1. Fix a τ–invariant hyperbolic metric σ. Then there is a

Bers pants decomposition P =P (σ) which is τ–invariant.

Proof. LetP0 =∅. Suppose that 0 ≤k <ξ(S) curves have been chosen

to form Pk. By induction we may assume that Pk is τ–invariant. Let Y

be a component of S∖Pk with ξ(Y )≥ 1. Note that since τ is orientation

reversing,τ does not ﬁx any boundary component of Y .

Pick any systole α for Y .

Claim. Either τ(α) =α or α∩τ(α) =∅.

Proof. Suppose not and take p∈ α∩τ(α). Then τ(p)∈ α∩τ(α) as

well, and, since τ has no ﬁxed points, p̸=τ(p). The points p and τ(p)

divide α into segments β and γ. Since τ is an isometry, we have

ℓσ(τ(α)) =ℓσ(α) and ℓσ(τ(β)) =ℓσ(β).

Now concatenate to obtain (possibly immersed) loops

β′ =β∗τ(β) and γ′ =γ∗τ(γ).

If β′ is null-homotopic then α∪τ(α) cuts a monogon or a bigon out

of S, contradicting our assumption that α was a geodesic. Suppose,

by way of contradiction, that β′ is homotopic to some boundary curve

b⊂∂Y . Since τ(β′) =β′, it follows that τ(b) and β′ are also homotopic.

Thusb and τ(b) cobound an annulus, implying that Y is an annulus, a

contradiction. The same holds for γ′.

Let β′′ and γ′′ be the geodesic representatives of β′ and γ′. Since β and

τ(β) meet transversely, β′′ has length in σ strictly smaller than 2ℓσ(β).

Similarly the length of γ′′ is strictly smaller than 2ℓσ(γ). Suppose that

β′′ is shorter then γ′′. It follows that β′′ strictly shorter than α. If β′′

is embedded then this contradicts the assumption that α was shortest.

54 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

If β′′ is not embedded then there is an embedded curve β′′′ inside of

a regular neighborhood of β′′ which is again essential, non-peripheral,

and has geodesic representative shorter than β′′. This is our ﬁnal

contradiction and the claim is proved. □

Thus, if τ(α) = α we let Pk+1 = Pk∪{α} and we are done. If

τ(α)̸= α then by the above claim τ(α)∩α =∅. In this case let

Pk+2 =Pk∪{α,τ (α)} and Lemma 16.1 is proved. □

Transversals are chosen with respect to a quadratic diﬀerential metric.

Suppose that α,β ∈C τ(S). If α and β do not ﬁll S then we may replace

S by the support of their union. Following Thurston [ 38] there exists

a square-tiled quadratic diﬀerential q with squares associated to the

points of α∩β. (See [ 6] for analysis of how the square-tiled surface

relates to paths in the curve complex.) Let qt be image of q under the

Teichm¨ uller geodesic ﬂow. We have:

Lemma 16.2. τ∗qt =qt.

Proof. Note that τ preserves α and also β. Since τ permutes the points

of α∩β it permutes the rectangles of the singular Euclidean metric qt

while preserving their vertical and horizontal foliations. Thus τ is an

isometry of the metric and the conclusion follows. □

We now choose the Teichm¨ uller geodesic{Σt|t∈ [−M,M ]} so that

the hyperbolic length of α is less than the Margulis constant in σ−M

and the same holds for β in σM. Also, α is the shortest curve in σ−M

and similarly for β in σM

Lemma 16.3. Fix t. There are transversals for Pt which are close to

being quadratic perpendicular in qt and which are τ–invariant.

Proof. Let P =Pt and ﬁx α∈P . Let X =S∖(P ∖α). There are two

cases: either τ(X)∩X =∅ or τ(X) =X. Suppose the former. So we

choose any transversal β⊂X close to being qt–perpendicular and take

τ(β) to be the transversal to τ(α).

Suppose now that τ(X) =X. It follows that X is a four-holed sphere.

The quotient X/τ is homeomorphic to a twice-holed RP2. Therefore

there are only four essential non-peripheral curves in X/τ. Two of these

are cores of M¨ obius bands and the other two are their doubles. The

cores meet in a single point. Perforce α is the double cover of one core

and we take β the double cover of the other.

It remains only to show that β is close to being qt–perpendicular.

Let Sα be the annular cover of S and lift qt to Sα. Let⊥ be the set of

qα

t –perpendiculars. This is a τ-invariant diameter one subset of C(Sα).

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 55

If dα(⊥,β ) is large then it follows that dα(⊥,τ (β)) is also large. Also,

τ(β) twists in the opposite direction from β. Thus

dα(β,τ (β))− 2dα(⊥,β ) =O(1)

and so dα(β,τ (β)) is large, contradicting the fact that β is τ–invariant.

□

Thus τ–invariant markings exist; these have bounded intersection

with the markings constructed in Section 15. It follows that the resulting

marking path satisﬁes the marking path and accessibility requirements,

Axioms 13.3 and 13.4.

16.2. The combinatorial path. As in Section 15 break the interval

[−M,M ] into short subintervals and produce a sequence of τ-invariant

markings{µn}N

n=0. To choose the combinatorial path, pick γn∈ base(µn)

so that γn is a τ–invariant curve or pair of curves and so that γn is

shortest in base(µn).

We now check the combinatorial path requirements given in Ax-

iom 13.5. Note that γ0 = α, γN = β; also the reindexing map is the

identity. Since

ι(γn,µr(n)) =ι(γn,µn) = 2

the ﬁrst requirement is satisﬁed. Since µn and µn+1 have bounded

intersection, the same holds for γn and γn+1. Projection to F , surgery,

and Lemma 2.2 imply that dCτ (γn,γn+1) is uniformly bounded. This

veriﬁes Axiom 13.5.

16.3. The classiﬁcation of holes. We now ﬁnish the classiﬁcation

of large holes for Cτ(S). Fix L0 > 3C3 + 2C2 + 2C1. Note that these

constants are available because we have veriﬁed the axioms that give

them.

Lemma 16.4. Suppose that α,β ∈C τ(S). Suppose that X⊂ S has

dX(α,β )>L 0. Then X is symmetric.

Proof. Let (Σt,qt) be the Teichm¨ uller geodesic deﬁned above and let σt

be the uniformizing hyperbolic metric. Since L0 >C 3 + 2C2 it follows

from the accessibility requirement that JX = [m,n ] is non-empty. Now

for all t in the interval of isolation IX

ℓσt(δ)<ϵ,

where δ is any component of ∂X and ϵ is the Margulis constant. Let

Y =τ(X). Since τ is an isometry (Lemma 16.2) and since the interval

of isolation is metrically deﬁned we have IY =IX and thus JY =JX.

56 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Deduce that ∂Y is also short in σt. This implies that ∂X∩∂Y =∅. If

X and Y overlap then by (iii) of Lemma 13.13 we have

dX(µm,µn)<C 3

and so by the triangle inequality, two applications of (2) of Axiom 13.4,

we have

dX(µ0,µN)< 3C3.

By the combinatorial axiom it follows that

dX(α,β )< 3C3 + 2C2

a contradiction. Deduce that either X =Y or X∩Y =∅ as desired. □

As noted in Section 6 this shows that the only hole for Cτ(S) is S

itself. Thus all holes trivially interfere, verifying Axiom 13.2.

16.4. The replacement axiom. We now verify Axiom 13.6 for sub-

surfaces Y ⊂ S with dY (α,β )≥ L0. (We may ignore all subsurfaces

with smaller projection by taking L1(Y )>L 0.)

By Lemma 16.4 the subsurface Y is symmetric. If Y is a hole then

Y =S and the ﬁrst requirement is vacuous. Suppose that Y is not a

hole. Suppose that γn is such that n∈ JY . Thus γn∈ base(µn). All

components of ∂Y are also pants curves in µn. It follows that we may

take any symmetric curve in ∂Y to be γ′ and we are done.

16.5. On straight intervals. Lastly we verify Axiom 13.11. Suppose

that [p,q ] is a straight interval. We must show that dCτ (γp,γq)≤

dS(γp,γq). Suppose that µp =νs and µq =νt; that is, s and t are the

times when µp,µq are short markings. Thus dX(µp,µq)≤L2 for every

X ⊊S. This implies that the Teichm¨ uller geodesic, along the straight

interval, lies in the thick part of Teichm¨ uller space.

Notice that dCτ (γp,γq) ≤ C2|p− q|, since for all i ∈ [p,q − 1],

dCτ (γi,γi+1)≤ C2. So it suﬃces to bound |p−q|. By our choice

of B0 and because the Teichm¨ uller geodesic lies in the thick part we

ﬁnd that|p−q|≤ dT (Σs, Σt). Raﬁ’s distance estimate (Theorem 15.3)

gives:

dT (Σs, Σt) =AdS(νs,νt).

Since νs =µp, νt =µq, and since γp∈ base(µp), γq∈ base(µq) deduce

that

dS(µp,µq)≤dS(γp,γq) + 4.

This veriﬁes Axiom 13.11. Thus the distance estimate holds forCτ(S) =

C(F ). Since there is only one hole for C(F ) we deduce that the map

C(F )→C (S) is a quasi-isometric embedding. As a corollary we have:

Theorem 16.5. The curve complex C(F ) is Gromov hyperbolic. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 57

17. Paths for the arc complex

Here we verify that our axioms hold for the arc complex A(S, ∆).

It is worth pointing out that the axioms may be veriﬁed using Te-

ichm¨ uller geodesics, train track splitting sequences, or resolutions of

hierarchies. Here we use the former because it also generalizes to the

non-orientable case; this is discussed at the end of this section.

First note that Axiom 13.2 follows from Lemma 7.3.

17.1. The marking path. We are given a pair of arcs α,β ∈A (X, ∆).

Recall that σS :A(X)→C (X) is the surgery map, deﬁned in Deﬁni-

tion 4.2. Let α′ =σS(α) and deﬁne β′ similarly. Note that α′ cuts a

pants oﬀ of S. As usual, we may assume that α′ and β′ ﬁll X. If not

we pass to the subsurface they do ﬁll.

As in the previous sections let q be the quadratic diﬀerential deter-

mined by α′ and β′. Exactly as above, ﬁx a marking path {µn}N

n=0.

This path satisﬁes the marking and accessibility axioms (13.3, 13.4).

17.2. The combinatorial path. Let Yn⊂ X be any component of

X∖ base(µn) meeting ∆. So Yn is a pair of pants. Let γn be any

essential arc in Yn with both endpoints in ∆. Since α′⊂ base(µ0) and

β′⊂ base(µN) we may choose γ0 =α and γN =β.

As in the previous section the reindexing map is the identity. It follows

immediately that ι(γn,µn)≤ 4. This bound, the bound on ι(µn,µn+1),

and Lemma 4.7 imply that ι(γn,γn+1) is likewise bounded. The usual

surgery argument shows that if two arcs have bounded intersection then

they have bounded distance. This veriﬁes Axiom 13.5.

17.3. The replacement and the straight axioms. Suppose that

Y ⊂ X is a subsurface and γn has n∈ JY . Let µn = νt; that is t is

the time when µn is a short marking. Thus ∂Y ⊂ base(µn) and so

γn∩∂Y =∅. So regardless of the hole-nature of Y we may take γ′ =γn

and the axiom is veriﬁed.

Axiom 13.11 is veriﬁed exactly as in Section 16.

17.4. Non-orientable surfaces. Suppose that F is non-orientable and

∆F is a collection of boundary components. Let S be the orientation

double cover and τ : S→S the involution so that S/τ =F . Let ∆ be

the preimage of ∆F . ThenAτ(S, ∆) is the invariant arc complex.

Suppose that αF,βF are vertices in A(F, ∆′). Let α,β be their

preimages. As above, without loss of generality, we may assume that

σF (αF ) and σF (βF ) ﬁll F . Note that σF (αF ) cuts a surface X oﬀ of

F . The surface X is either a pants or a twice-holed RP2. When X is

a pants we deﬁne α′⊂S to be the preimage of σF (αF ). When X is a

58 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

twice-holed RP2 we take γF to be a core of one of the two M¨ obius bands

contained in X and we deﬁne α′ to be the preimage of γF∪σF (αF ). We

deﬁne β′ similarly. Notice that α and α′ meet in at most four points.

We now use α′ and β′ to build a τ–invariant Teichm¨ uller geodesic.

The construction of the marking and combinatorial paths forAτ(S, ∆) is

unchanged. Notice that we may choose combinatorial vertices because

base(µn) is τ–invariant. There is a small annoyance: when X is a

twice-holed RP2 the ﬁrst vertex, γ0, is disjoint from but not equal to

α. Strictly speaking, the ﬁrst and last vertices are γ0 and γN; our

constants are stated in terms of their subsurface projection distances.

However, since α∩γ0 =∅, and the same holds for β,γN, their subsurface

projection distances are all bounded.

18. Background on train tracks

Here we give the necessary deﬁnitions and theorems regarding train

tracks. The standard reference is [ 31]. See also [ 30]. We follow closely

the discussion found in [27].

18.1. On tracks. A generic train track τ⊂S is a smooth, embedded

trivalent graph. As usual we call the vertices switches and the edges

branches. At every switch the tangents of the three branches agree.

Also, there are exactly two incoming branches and one outgoing branch

at each switch. See Figure 7 for the local model of a switch.

incoming

incoming

outgoing

Figure 7. The local model of a train track.

Let B(τ) be the set of branches. A transverse measure on τ is function

w :B→ R≥0 satisfying the switch conditions: at every switch the sum

of the incoming measures equals the outgoing measure. Let P (τ) be the

projectivization of the cone of transverse measures. Let V (τ) be the

vertices of P (τ). As discussed in the references, each vertex measure

gives a simple closed curve carried by τ.

For every track τ we refer to V (τ) as the marking corresponding to

τ (see Section 2.4). Note that there are only ﬁnitely many tracks up

to the action of the mapping class group. It follows that ι(V (τ)) is

uniformly bounded, depending only on the topological type of S.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 59

If τ and σ are train tracks, and Y⊂S is an essential surface, then

deﬁne

dY (τ,σ ) =dY (V (τ),V (σ)).

We also adopt the notation πY (τ) =πY (V (τ)).

A train track σ is obtained from τ by sliding if σ and τ are related as

in Figure 8. We say that a train track σ is obtained from τ by splitting

if σ and τ are related as in Figure 9.

Figure 8. All slides take place in a small regular neigh-

borhood of the aﬀected branch.

Figure 9. There are three kinds of splitting: right, left,

and central.

Again, since the number of tracks is bounded (up to the action of the

mapping class group) if σ is obtained from τ by either a slide or a split

we ﬁnd that ι(V (τ),V (σ)) is uniformly bounded.

18.2. The marking path. We will use sequences of train tracks to

deﬁne our marking path.

Deﬁnition 18.1. A sliding and splitting sequence is a collection{τn}N

n=0

of train tracks so that τn+1 is obtained from τn by a slide or a split.

The sequence{τn} gives a sequence of markings via the map τn↦→

Vn = V (τn). Note that the support of Vn+1 is contained within the

support of Vn because every vertex of τn+1 is carried by τn. Theorem

5.5 of [27] veriﬁes the remaining half of Axiom 13.3.

60 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Theorem 18.2. Fix a surface S. There is a constant A with the

following property. Suppose that {τn}N

n=0 is a sliding and splitting

sequence in S of birecurrent tracks. Suppose that Y⊂S is an essential

surface. Then the map n↦→πY (τn), as parameterized by splittings, is

an A–unparameterized quasi-geodesic. □

Note that, when Y =S, Theorem 18.2 is essentially due to the ﬁrst

author and Minsky; see Theorem 1.3 of [26].

In Section 5.2 of [27], for every sliding and splitting sequence{τn}N

n=0

and for any essential subsurface X ⊊S an accessible intervalIX⊂ [0,N ]

is deﬁned. Axiom 13.4 is now veriﬁed by Theorem 5.3 of [27].

18.3. Quasi-geodesics in the marking graph. We will also need

Theorem 6.1 from [27]. (See [16] for closely related work.)

Theorem 18.3. Fix a surface S. There is a constant A with the

following property. Suppose that {τn}N

n=0 is a sliding and splitting

sequence of birecurrent tracks, injective on slide subsequences, where VN

ﬁlls S. Then {V (τn)} is an A–quasi-geodesic in the marking graph. □

19. Paths for the disk complex

Suppose that V = Vg is a genus g handlebody. The goal of this

section is to verify the axioms of Section 13 for the disk complex D(V )

and so complete the proof of the distance estimate.

Theorem 19.1. There is a constant C0 = C0(V ) so that, for any

c≥C0 there is a constant A with

dD(D,E ) =A

∑

[dX(D,E )]c

independent of the choice of D and E. Here the sum ranges over the

set of holes X⊂∂V for the disk complex.

19.1. Holes. The fact that all large holes interfere is recorded above

as Lemma 12.13. This veriﬁes Axiom 13.2.

19.2. The combinatorial path. Suppose that D,E ∈D (V ) are disks

contained in a compressible hole X⊂S =∂V . As usual we may assume

that D and E ﬁll X. Recall that V (τ) is the set of vertices for the

track τ⊂X. We now appeal to a result of the ﬁrst author and Minsky,

found in [26].

Theorem 19.2. There exists a surgery sequence of disks {Di}K

i=0, a

sliding and splitting sequence of birecurrent tracks {τn}N

n=0, and a rein-

dexing function r : [0,K ]→ [0,N ] so that

• D0 =D,

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 61

• E∈VN,

• Di∩Di+1 =∅ for all i, and

• ι(∂Di,Vr(i)) is uniformly bounded for all i.

□

Remark 19.3. For the details of the proof we refer to [ 26]. Note

that the double-wave curve replacements of that paper are not needed

here; as X is a hole, no curve of ∂X compresses in V . It follows that

consecutive disks in the surgery sequence are disjoint (as opposed to

meeting at most four times). Also, in the terminology of [ 27], the disk

Di is a wide dual for the track τr(i). Finally, recurrence of τn follows

because E is fully carried by τN. Transverse recurrence follows because

D is fully dual to τ0.

ThusVn will be our marking path and Di will be our combinatorial

path. The requirements of Axiom 13.5 are now veriﬁed by Theorem 19.2.

19.3. The replacement axiom. We turn to Axiom 13.6. Suppose

that Y ⊂ X is an essential subsurface and Di has r(i)∈ JY . Let

n = r(i). From Theorem 19.2 we have that ι(∂Di,Vn) is uniformly

bounded. By Axiom 13.4 we have Y ⊂ supp(Vn) and ι(∂Y,µ n) is

bounded. It follows that there is a constant K depending only on ξ(S)

so that

ι(∂Di,∂Y )<K.

Isotope Di to have minimal intersection with ∂Y . As in Section 11.1

boundary compress Di as much as possible into the components of

X∖∂Y to obtain a disk D′ so that either

• D′ cannot be boundary compressed any more into X∖∂Y or

• D′ is disjoint from ∂Y .

We may arrange matters so that every boundary compression reduces

the intersection with ∂Y by at least a factor of two. Thus:

dD(Di,D′)≤ log2(K).

Suppose now that Y is a compressible hole. By Lemma 8.4 we ﬁnd

that ∂D′⊂Y and we are done.

Suppose now that Y is an incompressible hole. Since Y is large there

is an I-bundle T→ F , contained in the handlebody V , so that Y is

a component of ∂hT . Isotope D′ to minimize intersection with ∂vT .

Let ∆ be the union of components of ∂vT which are contained in ∂V .

Let Γ = ∂vT ∖∆. Notice that all intersections D′∩ Γ are essential arcs

in Γ: simple closed curves are ruled out by minimal intersection and

inessential arcs are ruled out by the fact that D′ cannot be boundary

compressed in the complement of∂Y . Let D′′ be a outermost component

62 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

of D′∖Γ. Then Lemma 8.5 implies that D′′ is isotopic in T to a vertical

disk.

IfD′′ =D′ then we may replace Di by the arc ρF (D′). The inductive

argument now occurs inside of the arc complex A(F,ρF (∆)).

Suppose that D′′̸=D′. Let A∈ Γ be the vertical annulus meeting

D′′. Let N be a regular neighborhood of D′′∪A, taken in T . Then

the frontier of N in T is again a vertical disk, call it D′′′. Note that

ι(D′′′,D′)<K − 1. Finally, replace Di by the arc ρF (D′′′).

Suppose now that Y is not a hole. Then some component S∖Y is

compressible. Applying Lemma 8.4 again, we ﬁnd that either D′ lies in

Z =X∖Y or in Y . This completes the veriﬁcation of Axiom 13.6.

19.4. Straight intervals. We end by checking Axiom 13.11. Suppose

that [p,q ]⊂ [0,K ] is a straight interval. Recall thatd Y (µr(p),µr(q))<L 2

for all strict subsurfaces Y ⊂X. We must check that dD(Dp,Dq)≤A

dX(Dp,Dq). Since dD(Dp,Dq)≤C2|p−q| it is enough to bound|p−q|.

Note that|p−q|≤| r(p)−r(q)| because the reindexing map is increasing.

Now,|r(p)−r(q)|≤AdM(X)(µr(p),µr(q)) because the sequence{µn} is

a quasi-geodesic in M(X) (Theorem 18.3). Increasing A as needed and

applying Theorem 4.10 we have

dM(µr(p),µr(q))≤A

∑

Y

[dY (µr(p),µr(q))]L2

and the right hand side is thus less than dX(µr(p),µr(q)) which in turn

is less than dX(Dp,Dq) + 2C2. This completes our discussion of Ax-

iom 13.11 and ﬁnishes the proof of Theorem 19.1.

20. Hyperbolicity

The ideas in this section are related to the notion of “time-ordered

domains” and to the hierarchy machine of [ 25] (see also Chapters 4

and 5 of Behrstock’s thesis [ 1]). As remarked above, we cannot use

those tools directly as the hierarchy machine is too rigid to deal with

the disk complex.

20.1. Hyperbolicity. We prove:

Theorem 20.1. Fix G =G(S), a combinatorial complex. Suppose that

G satisﬁes the axioms of Section 13. Then G is Gromov hyperbolic.

As corollaries we have

Theorem 20.2. The arc complex is Gromov hyperbolic. □

Theorem 20.3. The disk complex is Gromov hyperbolic. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 63

In fact, Theorem 20.1 follows quickly from:

Theorem 20.4. Fix G, a combinatorial complex. Suppose that G

satisﬁes the axioms of Section 13. Then for all A≥ 1 there exists

δ≥ 0 with the following property: Suppose that T ⊂G is a triangle

of paths where the projection of any side of T into into any hole is an

A–unparameterized quasi-geodesic. Then T is δ–slim.

Proof of Theorem 20.1. As laid out in Section 14 there is a uniform

constant A so that for any pair α,β ∈G there is a recursively constructed

path P ={γi}⊂G so that

• for any hole X for G, the projection πX(P) is an A–unparame-

terized quasi-geodesic and

•|P| =AdG(α,β ).

So if α∩β =∅ then|P| is uniformly short. Also, by Theorem 20.4,

triangles made of such paths are uniformly slim. Thus, by Theorem 3.11,

G is Gromov hyperbolic. □

The rest of this section is devoted to proving Theorem 20.4.

20.2. Index in a hole. For the following deﬁnitions, we assume that

α and β are ﬁxed vertices of G.

For any hole X and for any geodesic k∈C (X) connecting a point of

πX(α) to a point of πX(β) we also deﬁne ρk :G→ k to be the relation

πX|G :G →C(X) followed by taking closest points in k. Since the

diameter of ρk(γ) is uniformly bounded, we may simplify our formulas

by treating ρk as a function. Deﬁne index X :G→ N to be the index in

X:

index X(σ) =dX(α,ρk(σ)).

Remark 20.5. Suppose thatk′ is a diﬀerent geodesic connecting πX(α)

to πX(β) and index′

X is deﬁned with respect to k′. Then

| index X(σ)− index′

X(σ)|≤ 17δ + 4

by Lemma 3.7 and Lemma 3.8. After permitting a small additive error,

the index depends only on α,β,σ and not on the choice of geodesic k.

20.3. Back and sidetracking. Fix σ,τ ∈G . We say σ precedes τ by

at least K in X if

index X(σ) +K≤ index X(τ).

We say σ precedes τ by at most K if the inequality is reversed. If σ

precedes τ then we say τ succeeds σ.

Now take P ={σi} to be a path in G connecting α to β. Recall that

we have made the simplifying assumption that σi and σi+1 are disjoint.

64 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

We formalize a pair of properties enjoyed by unparameterized quasi-

geodesics. The path P backtracks at most K if for every hole X and all

indices i < jwe ﬁnd that σj precedes σi by at most K. The path P

sidetracks at most K if for every hole X and every index i we ﬁnd that

dX(σi,ρk(σi))≤K,

for some geodesic k connecting a point of πX(α) to a point of πX(β).

Remark 20.6. As in Remark 20.5, allowing a small additive error

makes irrelevant the choice of geodesic in the deﬁnition of sidetracking.

We note that, if P has bounded sidetracking, one may freely use in

calculation whichever of σi or ρk(σi) is more convenient.

20.4. Projection control. We say domains X,Y ⊂S overlap if ∂X

cuts Y and ∂Y cuts X. The following lemma, due to Behrstock [ 1,

4.2.1], is closely related to the notion of time ordered domains [25]. An

elementary proof is given in [23, Lemma 2.5].

Lemma 20.7. There is a constant M1 = M1(S) with the following

property. Suppose that X,Y are overlapping non-simple domains. If γ∈

AC(S) cuts both X and Y then either dX(γ,∂Y )<M 1 or dY (∂X,γ )<

M1. □

We also require a more specialized version for the case where X and

Y are nested.

Lemma 20.8. There is a constant M2 = M2(S) with the following

property. Suppose that X⊂ Y are nested non-simple domains. Fix

α,β,γ ∈ AC(S) that cut X. Fix k = [α′,β′] ⊂ C(Y ), a geodesic

connecting a point of πY (α) to a point of πY (β). Assume that dX(α,β )≥

M0, the constant given by Theorem 4.6. If dX(α,γ )≥M2 then

index Y (∂X)− 4≤ index Y (γ).

Symmetrically, we have

index Y (γ)≤ index Y (∂X) + 4

if dX(γ,β )≥M2. □

20.5. Finding the midpoint of a side. Fix A≥ 1. Let P,Q,R be

the sides of a triangle in G with vertices at α,β,γ . We assume that each

of P,Q, and R are A–unparameterized quasi-geodesics when projected

to any hole.

Recall that M0 = M0(S), M1 = M1(S), and M2 = M2(S) are

functions depending only on the topology of S. We may assume that if

T⊂S is an essential subsurface, then M0(S)>M 0(T ).

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 65

Now chooseK1≥ max{M0, 4M1,M 2, 8}+8δ suﬃciently large so that

any A–unparameterized quasi-geodesic in any hole back and side tracks

at most K1.

Claim 20.9. If σi precedes γ in X and σj succeeds γ in Y , both by at

least 2K1, then i<j .

Proof. To begin, as X and Y are holes and all holes interfere, we need

not consider the possibility that X∩Y =∅. If X =Y we immediately

deduce that

index X(σi) + 2K1≤ index X(γ)≤ index X(σj)− 2K1.

Thus index X(σi) + 4K1≤ index X(σj). Since P backtracks at most K1

we havei<j , as desired.

Suppose instead that X⊂Y . Since σi precedes γ in X we immedi-

ately ﬁndd X(α,β )≥ 2K1≥M0 andd X(α,γ )≥ 2K1−2δ≥M2. Apply

Lemma 20.8 to deduce index Y (∂X)− 4≤ index Y (γ). Since σj succeeds

γ in Y it follows that index Y (∂X)−4 + 2K1≤ index Y (σj). Again using

the fact that σi precedes γ in X we have that dX(σi,β )≥ M2. We

deduce from Lemma 20.8 that index Y (σi)≤ index Y (∂X) + 4. Thus

index Y (σi)− 8 + 2K1≤ index Y (σj).

Since P backtracks at most K1 in Y we again deduce that i<j . The

case where Y⊂X is similar.

Suppose now that X and Y overlap. Applying Lemma 20.7 and

breaking symmetry, we may assume that dX(γ,∂Y ) < M1. Since σi

precedes γ we have index X(γ)≥ 2K1. Lemma 3.7 now implies that

index X(∂Y )≥ 2K1−M1− 6δ. Thus,

dX(α,∂Y )≥ 2K1−M1− 8δ≥M1

where the ﬁrst inequality follows from Lemma 3.4.

Applying Lemma 20.7 again, we ﬁnd that dY (α,∂X ) < M1. Now,

since σj succeeds γ in Y , we deduce that index Y (σj) ≥ 2K1. So

Lemma 3.4 implies that dY (α,σj)≥ 2K1− 2δ. The triangle inequality

now gives

dY (∂X,σ j)≥ 2K1−M1− 2δ≥M1.

Applying Lemma 20.7 one last time, we ﬁnd that dX(∂Y,σ j) < M1.

Thusd X(γ,σj)≤ 2M1. Finally, Lemma 3.7 implies that the diﬀerence

in index (in X) between σi and σj is at least 2K1−2M1−6δ. Since this

is greater than the backtracking constant, K1, it follows that i<j . □

Let σα∈P be the last vertex of P preceding γ by at least 2K1 in

some hole. If no such vertex of P exists then take σα =α.

66 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Claim 20.10. For every hole X and geodesic h connecting πX(α) to

πX(β):

dX(σα,ρh(γ))≤ 3K1 + 6δ + 1

Proof. Since σi and σi+1 are disjoint we have dX(σi,σi+1)≥ 3 and so

Lemma 3.7 implies that

| index X(σi+1)− index X(σi)|≤ 6δ + 3.

Since P is a path connecting α to β the image ρh(P) is 6δ + 3–dense

in h. Thus, if index X(σα) + 2K1 + 6δ + 3< index X(γ) then we have a

contradiction to the deﬁnition of σα.

On the other hand, if index X(σα)≥ index X(γ)+2K1 then σα precedes

and succeeds γ in X. This directly contradicts Claim 20.9.

We deduce that the diﬀerence in index between σα and γ in X is at

most 2K1 + 6δ + 3. Finally, as P sidetracks by at most K1 we have

dX(σα,ρh(γ))≤ 3K1 + 6δ + 3

as desired. □

We deﬁne σβ to be the ﬁrst σi to succeed γ by at least 2K1 — if no

such vertex of P exists take σβ =β. If α =β then σα =σβ. Otherwise,

from Claim 20.9, we immediately deduce that σα comes before σβ in P.

A symmetric version of Claim 20.10 applies to σβ: for every hole X

dX(ρh(γ),σβ)≤ 3K1 + 6δ + 3.

20.6. Another side of the triangle. Recall now that we are also

given a path R ={τi} connecting α to γ in G. As before, R has

bounded back and sidetracking. Thus we again ﬁnd vertices τα and

τγ the last/ﬁrst to precede/succeed β by at least 2K1. Again, this is

deﬁned in terms of the closest points projection of β to a geodesic of

the form h = [πX(α),πX(γ)]. By Claim 20.10, for every hole X, τα and

τγ are close to ρh(β).

By Lemma 3.6, if k = [πX(α),πX(β)], then dX(ρk(γ),ρh(β))≤ 6δ.

We deduce:

Claim 20.11. dX(σα,τα)≤ 6K1 + 18δ + 2. □

This claim and Claim 20.10 imply that the body of the trianglePQR

is bounded in size. We now show that the legs are narrow.

Claim 20.12. There is a constant N2 = N2(S) with the following

property. For every σi≤σα in P there is a τj≤τα in R so that

dX(σi,τj)≤N2

for every hole X.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 67

Proof. We only sketch the proof, as the details are similar to our previous

discussion. Fix σi≤σα.

Suppose ﬁrst that no vertex of R precedes σi by more than 2 K1

in any hole. So ﬁx a hole X and geodesics k = [πX(α),πX(β)] and

h = [πX(α),πX(γ)]. Then ρh(σi) is within distance 2 K1 of πX(α).

Appealing to Claim 20.11, bounded sidetracking, and hyperbolicity of

C(X) we ﬁnd that the initial segments

[πX(α),ρk(σα)], [πX(α),ρh(τα)]

of k and h respectively must fellow travel. Because of bounded back-

tracking along P, ρk(σi) lies on, or at least near, this initial segment of

k. Thus by Lemma 3.8 ρh(σi) is close to ρk(σi) which in turn is close

to πX(σi), because P has bounded sidetracking. In short, dX(α,σi) is

bounded for all holes X. Thus we may take τj = τ0 = α and we are

done.

Now suppose that some vertex of R precedes σi by at least 2K1 in

some hole X. Take τj to be the last such vertex in R. Following the

proof of Claim 20.9 shows that τj comes before τα in R. The argument

now required to bound dX(σi,τj) is essentially identical to the proof of

Claim 20.10. □

By the distance estimate, we ﬁnd that there is a uniform neighborhood

of [σ0,σα]⊂P , taken in G, which contains [τ0,τα]⊂P . The slimness of

PQR follows directly. This completes the proof of Theorem 20.4. □

21. Coarsely computing Hempel distance

We now turn to our topological application. Recall that a Heegaard

splitting is a triple (S,V,W ) consisting of a surface and two handlebodies

where V∩W =∂V =∂W =S. Hempel [20] deﬁnes the quantity

dS(V,W ) = min

{

dS(D,E )|D∈D (V ),E ∈D (W )

}

and calls it the distance of the splitting. Note that a splitting can

be completely determined by giving a pair of cut systems: simplices

D⊂D (V ), E⊂D (W ) where the corresponding disks cut the containing

handlebody into a single three-ball. The triple ( S, D, E) is a Heegaard

diagram. The goal of this section is to prove:

Theorem 21.1. There is a constant R1 = R1(S) and an algorithm

that, given a Heegaard diagram (S, D, E), computes a number N so that

|dS(V,W )−N|≤ R1.

Let ρV :C(S)→D (V ) be the closest points relation:

ρV (α) =

{

D∈D (V )| for all E∈D (V ), dS(α,D )≤dS(α,E )

}

.

68 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

Theorem 21.1 follows from:

Theorem 21.2. There is a constant R0 = R0(V ) and an algorithm

that, given an essential curve α⊂S and a cut system D⊂D (V ), ﬁnds

a disk C∈D (V ) so that

dS(C,ρV (α))≤R0.

Proof of Theorem 21.1. Suppose that (S, D, E) is a Heegaard diagram.

Using Theorem 21.2 we ﬁnd a disk D within distance R0 of ρV (E).

Again using Theorem 21.2 we ﬁnd a disk E within distance R0 of

ρW (D). Notice that E is deﬁned using D and not the cut system D.

Since computing distance between ﬁxed vertices in the curve complex

is algorithmic [22, 37] we may compute dS(D,E ). By the hyperbolicity

of C(S) (Theorem 3.2) and by the quasi-convexity of the disk set

(Theorem 4.9) this is the desired estimate. □

Very brieﬂy, the algorithm asked for in Theorem 21.2 searches an

R2–neighborhood in M(S) about a splitting sequence from D to α.

Here are the details.

Algorithm 21.3. We are given α∈C (S) and a cut system D⊂D (V ).

Build a train track τ in S =∂V as follows: make D and α tight. Place

one switch on every disk D∈ D. Homotope all intersections of α with

D to run through the switch. Collapse bigons of α inside of S∖D to

create the branches. Now make τ a generic track by combing away from

D [31, Proposition 1.4.1]. Note that α is carried by τ and so gives a

transverse measure w.

Build a splitting sequence of measured tracks {τn}N

n=0 where τ0 =τ,

τN =α, and τn+1 is obtained by splitting the largest switch of τn (as

determined by the measure imposed by α).

Let µn = V (τn) be the vertices of τn. For each ﬁlling marking µn

list all markings in the ball B(µn,R 2)⊂M (S), where R2 is given by

Lemma 21.5 below. (If µ0 does not ﬁll S then output D and halt.)

For every marking ν so produced we use Whitehead’s algorithm (see

Lemma 21.4) to try and ﬁnd a disk meeting some curve γ∈ν at most

twice. For every disk C found computed S(α,C ) [22, 37]. Finally, output

any disk which minimizes this distance, among all disks considered, and

halt.

We use the following form of Whitehead’s algorithm [3]:

Lemma 21.4. There is an algorithm that, given a cut system D⊂

V and a curve γ ⊂ S, outputs a disk C ⊂ V so that ι(γ,∂C ) =

min{ι(γ,∂E )|E∈D (V )}. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 69

We now discuss the constantR2. We begin by noticing that the track

τn is transversely recurrent because α is fully carried and D is fully

dual. Thus by Theorem 18.2 and by Morse stability, for any essential

Y ⊂S there is a stability constant M3 for the path πY (µn). Let δ be

the hyperbolicity constant for C(S) (Theorem 3.2) and let Q be the

quasi-convexity constant for D(V )⊂C (S) (Theorem 4.9).

Since ι(D,µ 0) is bounded we will, at the cost of an additive error,

identify their images in C(S). Now, for every n pick some En∈ρV (µn).

Lemma 21.5. There is a constant R2 with the following property.

Suppose that n < m, dS(µn,En),dS(µm,Em) ≤ M3 + δ + Q, and

dS(µn,µm)≥ 2(M3 +δ +Q)+5 . Then there is a marking ν∈B(µn,R 2)

and a curve γ∈ν so that either:

• γ bounds a disk in V ,

• γ⊂∂Z , where Z is a non-hole or

• γ⊂∂Z , where Z is a large hole.

Proof of Lemma 21.5. Choose points σ,σ′ in the thick part of T (S)

so that all curves of µn have bounded length in σ and so that En

has length less than the Margulis constant in σ′. As in Section 15

there is a Teichm¨ uller geodesic and associated markings{νk}K

k=0 so that

dM(ν0,µn) is bounded and En∈ base(νK).

We say a hole X⊂S is small if diam X(D(V ))< 61.

Claim. There is a constant R3 so that for any small hole X we have

dX(µn,νK)<R 3.

Proof. If dX(µn,νK)≤M0 then we are done. If the distance is greater

than M0 then Theorem 4.6 gives a vertex of the C(S)–geodesic connect-

ing µn to En with distance at most one from ∂X. It follows from the

triangle inequality that every vertex of the C(S)–geodesic connecting

µm to Em cuts X. Another application of Theorem 4.6 gives

dX(µm,Em)<M 0.

Since X is small dX(Em, D),dX(En, D)≤ 60. Since ι(νK,En) = 2 the

distance dX(νK,En) is bounded.

Finally, becausep↦→πX(µp) is an A–unparameterized quasi-geodesic

in C(X) it follows that dX(D,µn) is also bounded and the claim is

proved. □

Now consider all strict subsurfaces Y so that

dY (µn,νM)≥R3.

None of these are small holes, by the claim above. If there are no

such surfaces then Theorem 4.10 bounds dM(µn,νM): taking the cutoﬀ

70 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

constant larger than

max{R3,C 0,M 3 +δ +Q}

ensures that all terms on the right-hand side vanish. In this case the

additive error in Theorem 4.10 is the desired constantR2 and the lemma

is proved.

If there are such surfaces then choose one, say Z, that minimizes

ℓ = minJZ. Thus dY (µn,νℓ) < C3 for all strict non-holes and all

strict large holes. Since dS(µn,En)≤ M3 +δ +Q and{νm} is an

unparameterized quasi-geodesic [33, Theorem 6.1] we ﬁnd thatd S(µn,νl)

is uniformly bounded. The claim above bounds distances in small holes.

As before we ﬁnd a suﬃciently large cutoﬀ so that all terms on the

right-hand side of Theorem 4.10 vanish. Again the additive error of

Theorem 4.10 provides the constantR2. Since ∂Z⊂ base(νℓ) the lemma

is proved. □

To prove the correctness of Algorithm 21.3 it suﬃces to show that

the disk produced is close to ρV (α). Let m be the largest index so that

for all n≤m we have

dS(µn,En)≤M3 +δ +Q.

It follows thatµm+1 lies within distanceM3+δ of the geodesic [α,ρV (α)].

Recall that dS(µn,µn+1)≤C1 for any value of n. A shortcut argument

shows that

dS(µm,ρV (α))≤ 2C1 + 3M3 + 3δ +Q.

Let n≤m be the largest index so that

2(M3 +δ +Q) + 5≤dS(µn,µm).

If no such n exists then take n = 0. Now, Lemma 21.5 implies that

there is a disk C with dS(C,µn)≤ 4R2 and this disk is found during

the running of Algorithm 21.3. It follows from the above inequalities

that

dS(C,α )≤ 4R2 + 5M3 + 5δ + 3Q + 5 + 2C1 +dS(α,ρV (α)).

So the disk C′, output by the algorithm, is at least this close to α in

C(S). Examining the triangle with vertices α,ρV (α),C′ and using a

ﬁnal short-cut argument gives

dS(C′,ρV (α))≤ 4R2 + 5M3 + 9δ + 5Q + 5 + 2C1.

This completes the proof of Theorem 21.2. □

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 71

References

[1] Jason Behrstock. Asymptotic geometry of the mapping class group

and Teichm¨ uller space . PhD thesis, SUNY Stony Brook, 2004.

http://www.math.columbia.edu/∼jason/thesis.pdf. [62, 64]

[2] Jason Behrstock, Cornelia Drutu, and Lee Mosher. Thick metric spaces, relative

hyperbolicity, and quasi-isometric rigidity. arXiv:math/0512592. [13]

[3] John Berge. Heegaard documentation. documentation of computer program

available at computop.org. [68]

[4] Mladen Bestvina and Koji Fujiwara. Quasi-homomorphisms on mapping class

groups. Glas. Mat. Ser. III , 42(62)(1):213–236, 2007. arXiv:math/0702273. [3,

16]

[5] Joan S. Birman. The topology of 3-manifolds, Heegaard distance

and the mapping class group of a 2-manifold. In Problems on map-

ping class groups and related topics , volume 74 of Proc. Sympos.

Pure Math. , pages 133–149. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2006.

http://www.math.columbia.edu/∼jb/papers.html. [2]

[6] Brian H. Bowditch. Intersection numbers and the hyperbolicity of the curve

complex. J. Reine Angew. Math. , 598:105–129, 2006. bhb-curvecomplex.pdf.

[3, 54]

[7] Tara E. Brendle and Dan Margalit. Commensurations of the Johnson kernel.

Geom. Topol., 8:1361–1384 (electronic), 2004. arXiv:math/0404445. [13]

[8] Martin R. Bridson and Andr´ e Haeﬂiger.Metric spaces of non-positive curvature.

Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. [7]

[9] Jeﬀrey F. Brock. The Weil-Petersson metric and volumes of 3-dimensional

hyperbolic convex cores. J. Amer. Math. Soc. , 16(3):495–535 (electronic), 2003.

arXiv:math/0109048. [13]

[10] Alberto Cavicchioli and Fulvia Spaggiari. A note on irreducible Heegaard

diagrams. Int. J. Math. Math. Sci. , pages Art. ID 53135, 11, 2006. [2]

[11] Young-Eun Choi and Kasra Raﬁ. Comparison between Teichm¨ uller and Lips-

chitz metrics. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) , 76(3):739–756, 2007. math.GT/0510136.

[11]

[12] M. Coornaert, T. Delzant, and A. Papadopoulos. G´ eom´ etrie et th´ eorie des

groupes. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990. Les groupes hyperboliques de Gromov.

[7]

[13] Robert H. Gilman. The geometry of cycles in the Cayley diagram of a group.

In The mathematical legacy of Wilhelm Magnus: groups, geometry and special

functions (Brooklyn, NY, 1992) , volume 169 of Contemp. Math., pages 331–340.

Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994. [9]

[14] Robert H. Gilman. On the deﬁnition of word hyperbolic groups. Math. Z. ,

242(3):529–541, 2002. [9]

[15] Mikhael Gromov. Hyperbolic groups. In Essays in group theory , pages 75–263.

Springer, New York, 1987. [7]

[16] Ursula Hamenst¨ adt. Geometry of the mapping class groups. I. Boundary

amenability. Invent. Math., 175(3):545–609, 2009. [60]

[17] Kevin Hartshorn. Heegaard splittings of Haken manifolds

have bounded distance. Paciﬁc J. Math. , 204(1):61–75, 2002.

http://nyjm.albany.edu:8000/Pac J/2002/204-1-5nf.htm. [27]

72 HOW ARD MASUR AND SAUL SCHLEIMER

[18] Willam J. Harvey. Boundary structure of the modular group. In Riemann

surfaces and related topics: Proceedings of the 1978 Stony Brook Conference

(State Univ. New York, Stony Brook, N.Y., 1978) , pages 245–251, Princeton,

N.J., 1981. Princeton Univ. Press. [5]

[19] A. Hatcher and W. Thurston. A presentation for the mapping class group of a

closed orientable surface. Topology, 19(3):221–237, 1980. [13]

[20] John Hempel. 3-manifolds as viewed from the curve complex. Topology,

40(3):631–657, 2001. arXiv:math/9712220. [2, 5, 67]

[21] Tsuyoshi Kobayashi. Heights of simple loops and pseudo-Anosov homeomor-

phisms. In Braids (Santa Cruz, CA, 1986) , pages 327–338. Amer. Math. Soc.,

Providence, RI, 1988. [6, 12, 27]

[22] Jason Leasure. Geodesics in the complex of curves of a surface. Ph.D. thesis.

http://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/handle/2152/1700/leasurejp46295.pdf.

[68]

[23] Johanna Mangahas. Uniform uniform exponential growth of subgroups

of the mapping class group. Geom. Funct. Anal. , 19(5):1468–1480, 2010.

arXiv:0805.0133. [64]

[24] Howard A. Masur and Yair N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of curves. I.

Hyperbolicity. Invent. Math., 138(1):103–149, 1999. arXiv:math/9804098. [3,

6, 8]

[25] Howard A. Masur and Yair N. Minsky. Geometry of the complex of

curves. II. Hierarchical structure. Geom. Funct. Anal. , 10(4):902–974, 2000.

arXiv:math/9807150. [3, 4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 38, 51, 62, 64]

[26] Howard A. Masur and Yair N. Minsky. Quasiconvexity in the curve complex.

In In the tradition of Ahlfors and Bers, III , volume 355 of Contemp. Math.,

pages 309–320. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004. arXiv:math/0307083.

[3, 4, 12, 60, 61]

[27] Howard A. Masur, Lee Mosher, and Saul Schleimer. On train track splitting

sequences. arXiv:1004.4564. [3, 4, 58, 59, 60, 61]

[28] Darryl McCullough. Virtually geometrically ﬁnite mapping class groups of

3-manifolds. J. Diﬀerential Geom., 33(1):1–65, 1991. [7]

[29] Yair Minsky. The classiﬁcation of Kleinian surface groups. I. Models and bounds.

Ann. of Math. (2) , 171(1):1–107, 2010. arXiv:math/0302208. [11]

[30] Lee Mosher. Train track expansions of measured foliations. 2003.

http://newark.rutgers.edu/∼mosher/. [58]

[31] R. C. Penner and J. L. Harer. Combinatorics of train tracks , volume 125 of

Annals of Mathematics Studies . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,

1992. [58, 68]

[32] Robert C. Penner. A construction of pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms. Trans.

Amer. Math. Soc., 310(1):179–197, 1988. [6]

[33] Kasra Raﬁ. Relative hyperbolicity in Teichm¨ uller space, 2010. Preprint.

http://www.math.ou.edu/∼raﬁ/research/Fellow.pdf. [3, 4, 51, 52, 70]

[34] Kasra Raﬁ and Saul Schleimer. Covers and the curve complex. Geom. Topol.,

13(4):2141–2162, 2009. arXiv:math/0701719. [38, 42]

[35] Martin Scharlemann. The complex of curves on nonorientable surfaces. J.

London Math. Soc. (2) , 25(1):171–184, 1982. [6]

[36] Saul Schleimer. Notes on the curve complex. http://www.warwick.ac.uk/ mas-

gar/Maths/notes.pdf. [5]

THE GEOMETRY OF THE DISK COMPLEX 73

[37] Kenneth J. Shackleton. Tightness and computing distances in the curve complex.

arXiv:math/0412078. [68]

[38] William P. Thurston. On the geometry and dynamics of diﬀeomorphisms of

surfaces. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) , 19(2):417–431, 1988. [6, 21, 54]

Department of Mathematics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois

60637

E-mail address : masur@math.uic.edu

Department of Mathematics, University of W arwick, Coventry, CV4

7AL, UK

E-mail address : s.schleimer@warwick.ac.uk