and thirdly that the limit surfaces relatively exit the manifold as their restriction exits the neutered part. These issues are all minor, and do not introduce any real comp lications in the proof. The only question whose answer might not be immediatl y apparent is how to perturb the metricµ to thegt metrics near cusps; it turns out that this is straightforward to do, and technically easier than deformations alo ng geodesics, since the perturbed metrics actually have curvature bounded above by 0. W e will ﬁnd an exhaustion ofN by increasingly larger neutered spacesN t 0, each endowed with a metric gt, which is obtained from the µ -metric by deforming it along the geodesics ∆1 and along∂N t 0. Our∂W t will restrict togt-area minimizing 54 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI representatives of the isotopy class of ∂W∩ N t 0. The convergence and regularity of the limit surface ∂W ′ near the geodesics will proceed exactly as in §1 and§2. The convegence and regularity in the cusps will follow from §1 using the absence ofP -essential annuli disjoint from ∆1. T o describe the deformed geometry along the cusps, we ﬁrst re call the usual hyperbolic geometry of the (rank 1) cusps. W e parameterize a rank 1 cuspC as S1× [1,∞ )× R, where the initial S1× [1,∞ ) factor is a 2–dimensional cusp C. With the hyperbolic metric, the three co–ordinate vector ﬁe lds are orthogonal; we denote these by ∂ ∂θ, ∂ ∂z and ∂ ∂y respectively , so thatθ∈ S1,z∈ [1,∞ ) andy∈ R. An orthonormal basis in the hyperbolic metric is z ∂ ∂θ,z ∂ ∂z,z ∂ ∂y . Let h : R+→ R+ be a monotone increasing function with h(z) = z forz <1, andh(z) = 2 forz≥ 3. Then let ht(z) = 1 1− th((1− t)z) and deﬁnegt onC to be the metric with orthonormal basisht(z) ∂ ∂θ,h t(z) ∂ ∂z,h t(z) ∂ ∂y . Notice that the group of Euclidean symmetries of the boundar y∂C extends to an isometry ofC for thegt metric, for all t. In particular, the surface Hs =S1× [1,∞ )× s is totally geodesic for the gt metric, and therefore acts as a barrier surface for allt. Moreover, ast→ 1, the gt metrics converge to the hyperbolic metrics on compact subsets, and in fact for every compact K⊂C , there is an s >0 such that the gt and the hyperbolic metrics agree for t≤ s. Finally , for each t > 0, the subset S1× [3/ (1− t),∞ )× R⊂C is isometric to a Euclidean product, for the gt metric, and therefore the surface Ft =S1× 3 1− t× R is totally geodesic for the gt metric, and also acts as a barrier surface. Finally , notice that thegt metrics lift to a family of isometric metrics on H3, and by the symmetries above, therefore have uniformly pinched s ectional curvatures, and are uniformly bilipschitz to the hyperbolic metric in th e region bounded away from the cusps by Ft. LetN t 0 be the neutered space whose boundary consists of the surfaces of typeFt constructed above. Endow N t 0 with thegt metric. Now apply [MSY], as in Lemma 2.3, to the surface ∂W∩N t 0 to obtain the surface∂W 1 t which isgt-least area among all surfaces properly isotopic to ∂W∩ N t 0. By extending ∂W 1 t vertically we obtain the surface ∂W t⊂ N which is properly isotopic to ∂W . As in Lemma 2.3 these surfaces weakly converge geometrically to a surface ∂W ′. W e will show that there is a proper isotopy of ∂W to∂W ′. Let N ǫ 0 denote a ﬁxed neutered space transverse to ∂W ′ and countably many ∂W t’s which converge to ∂W ′. Deﬁne ∂W ǫ t to be ∂W t∩ N ǫ 0 together with the disc components of ∂W t\N ǫ 0. Since areagt (∂W ǫ t ) is uniformly bounded, and the hyperbolic area form is dominated on all 2–planes by gt, the hyperbolic area of ∂W ǫ t is uniformly bounded. W e show that a disc D of ∂W t\N ǫ 0 cannot stray too far into the cusp and hence for all t, ∂W ǫ t ⊂ N η 0 for some sufﬁciently small η. Indeed, the lift ˜D to the universal cover ˜N ofN is an embedded disc of uniformly bounded area. If t is very close to 1, then dρ (∂N ǫ 0,∂N t 0) = dt > 0. If x∈ ˜D and SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 55 dρ (x,∂N ǫ 0∪ N t 0) = dt/ 2, then areaρ ( ˜D∩ (N ǫ 0− N t 0)) > πd2 t/ 4. Therefore, for t sufﬁciently large, ˜D and henceD has uniformly bounded ρ-diameter. Therefore, if ǫ < η, then the ∂W ǫ t ’s converge weakly to the surface N ǫ 0∩ W ′ which we deﬁne to be ∂W ′ ǫ. For t sufﬁciently large∂W ǫ t and∂W ′ ǫ are of the same topological type and very close geometrically . By Lemma 7.1 1,∂W ′ ǫ∩ N ǫ 0 has no components which can be homotoped rel boundary into ∂N ǫ 0, hence ∂W ǫ t shares the similar property . Since ∂W has no P -essential annuli disjoint from ∆1 it follows that each component of ∂W ǫ t\intN0 can be properly homotoped in ∂W ǫ t into an end of that surface. Therefore, if some non disc component of ∂W t− intN ǫ 0 was not a half open annulus, then one can ﬁnd a component E of∂W t∩ N ǫ 0 which can be homotoped rel ∂E into∂N ǫ 0, which is a contradiction. Note that ∂W ′ ǫ is of the same topological type as ∂W ∩ N0 and and that the ∂W ′ ǫ’s form an exhaustion of ∂W ′. By arguing as in the proof of Lemma 1.25, there exists a homot opy F : ∂W× I→ N with the property that F (∂W × 0) = ∂W , for inﬁnitely many t< 1,F (∂W× t) = ∂W t andF (∂W× 1) = ∂W ′. If∂W ′ intersects∂C in the subset S1× [s,∞ ) for some s, then for t sufﬁciently large∂W t must intersect ∂C in the subset S1× [s− ǫ,∞ ). Since projection to the barrier surface Hs− ǫ along horoannuli and horotori is area reducing, this implie s that∂W t∩C is contained in S1× [1,∞ )× [s− ǫ,∞ ), which in turn implies that W ′∩C⊂ S1× [1,∞ )× [s,∞ ). As in Lemma 2.3, the surfaces ∂W t converge on compact subsets to ∂W ′. The main results of§1 imply that ∂W ′ is ∆1–minimal. A similar argument proves similar facts about St,Tt andT ′. □ Let Gi denote in ∗ (π1(F )) ⊂ π1(Wi). Fix a basepoint f ∈ F . Let Xi denote the covering space of Wi (based at f ) with group Gi. The homotopy of Γi intoF supported inWi lifts toXi, hence provides us with a canonical ˆΓi of closed lifts of Γi in 1-1 correspondence with Γi. Since Wi