there is no distributional positive curvature concentrated along the coincidence set L. Since T\Γ is a minimal surface, the curvature of T is bounded above by − 1 on this subset. It will follow by Gauss–Bonnet that T is CAT(− 1). W e ﬁrst treat a simpler problem in Euclidean 3–space, which we denote by R3. Let Σ be an embedded surface in R3 which is C3 outside a subset X which is contained in a geodesic γ in R3, and which is C1 alongX from either side along the interior of X, and C1 at non–interior points of X. Then we claim, for each subsurfaceR⊂ Σ withC3 boundary∂R⊂ Σ\X, that ∫ R\ X KΣ = 2πχ (R)− ∫ ∂R κdl Compare Lemma 1.3. In other words, we want to show that X is a “removable singularity” for R, at least with respect to the Gauss–Bonnet formula. Letφ : R\X→ S2 denote the Gauss map, which takes each point p∈ R to its unit normal, in the unit sphere of S2. Then KΣ is the pullback of the area form by φ. Let R denote the completion of R\X with respect to the path metric. Then R is obtained from R by cutting it open along each interval in R∩ X, and sewing in two copies of the interval thereby removed. Notice that ther e is a natural forgetful mapR→ R. 22 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI By the assumptions about the regularity ofR, the Gauss mapφ actually extends to a continuous mapφ :R→ S2. Moreover, since X is contained in a geodesic γ of R3, the image φ(R\R) is contained in a great circle C inS2. For each boundary component τ ofR, we claim that the map φ : τ→ C has degree zero. For, otherwise, by a degree argument, there are pointsp± ∈ R which map to the same point in p, for which φ(p+) = −φ(p− ), and the graphs of φ(p+) and−φ(p− ) locally have a nonzero algebraic intersection number. It fo llows that the local sheets of R from either side must actually intersect along p, contrary to the fact that Σ is embedded. It follows that we can sew in a disk to R along each boundary component to get a surface R ′ homeomorphic toR, with∂R ′ =∂R , and extendφ toφ :R ′ → S2 by mapping each such disk into C. Now , the surfaceR ′ can be perturbed slightly in a neighborhood of X to a new surfaceR ′′ which isC3 in R3, in such a way that the Gauss map of R ′′ is a perturbation ofφ. So the usual Gauss–Bonnet formula (Lemma 1.3) shows that ∫ R′′ K = 2πχ (R)− ∫ ∂R κdl But ∫ R ′′K is just the integral of the area form on S2 pulled back by the Gauss map; it follows that ∫ R ′′ K = ∫ S2 degree(φ(R ′ )) and ∫ S2 degree(φ(R ′′ )) = ∫ S2 degree(φ(R ′ )) since one map is obtained from the other by a small perturbati on supported away from the boundary . Since the measure ofC is zero, this last integral is just equal to ∫ S2\ C degree(φ(R ′ )) = ∫ R\ X K and the claim is proved. Now we show how to apply this to our shrinkwrapped surface T . W e use the following trick. Let jt with t∈ [0, 1) be a family of metrics on M , conformally equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, which agree with the hy perbolic metric outsideNr(1− t), which are Euclidean onNr(1− t)/ 2, and which have curvature pinched between− 1 and 0, and are rotationally and translationally symmetric along the core geodesic. Then we let Tt be the surface obtained by shrinkwrapping S with respect to the jt metric. I.e. we let gs,t be a family of metrics as in Deﬁnition 1.17 which agree with thejt metric outsideNr(1− t)(1− s), construct minimal surfacesSs,t as in Lemma 1.20, and so on, limiting to the immersed surface Tt which is minimal for the jt metric on M\Γ, and C1+1/ 2 alongTt∩ Γ. Arguing locally as above, we see that small subsurfaces of Tt contained in the Euclidean tubes Nr(1− t)/ 2 satisfy Gauss–Bonnet in the complement of the coincidence set. By Lemma 1.2, the surfacesTt all have curvature bounded above by 0, and bounded above by− 1 outsideNr(1− t). By Gauss–Bonnet for geodesic triangles, Tt is CAT(0), and actually CAT(− 1) outsideNr(1− t). Now take the limit as t→ 1. Some subsequence of the surfaces Tt converges to a limit which by abuse of notation we denote T . Note that this is not necessarily SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 23 the same as the surface T constructed in previous sections, but it enjoys the same properties. Again, by Gauss–Bonnet for geodesic triangles , the limit is actually CAT(− 1), and the lemma is proved. □ This completes the proof of Theorem 1.10. Problem 1.35. Develop a simplicial or PL theory of shrinkwrapping. Remark 1.36. Since this paper appeared in preprint form, Soma has develop ed some elements of a PL theory of shrinkwrapping; see [Som]. Th is theory proves a PL analogue of Theorem 1.10. 2. T HE MAIN CONSTRUCTION LEMMA The purpose of this section is to state the main construction Lemma 2.3 and show how it follows easily from Theorem 1.10. 2.1. Shrinkwrapping in covers. Let N be a complete, orientable, parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in N , just as in the statement of Theorem 1.10. For the purposes of introducing the Main Construction Lemma, we will assume t hatN has a single endE. W e consider the family of gt and gs,t metrics, as in Deﬁnition 1.17 and Lemma 1.34. Suppose there is an embedded surface ∂W inN\Γ which separates off the end ofN from a compact submanifold W⊂ N . Let X be a covering space of W (possibly inﬁnite). The preimage of the geodesics Γ are a collection of locally ﬁnite geodesics ˆΓ⊂ X, some of which might be ﬁnite, and some inﬁnite. Let ∆⊂ ˆΓ be some nonempty collection, consisting entirely of simple closed geodesics. Then we can consider a second surface S⊂ X\∆ and can ask whether it is possible to shrinkwrapS rel. ∆. Notice that we cannot directly apply Theorem 1.10 because the hyperbolic manifold X is not complete, and therefore a shrinkwrap representative of S might not exist. However, we note that for each metric gt onN , we get agt locally least area representative ∂W t isotopic to ∂W . The submanifold Wt of N bounded by∂W t lifts to a covering space Xt which is homeomorphic to X. The metricgt pulls back to a metric on Xt which by abuse of notation we also refer to asgt. Then ∂X t which is a lift of ∂W t isgt locally least area, and therefore acts as a barrier surface. It follows that we can ﬁnd, for each t, a surface St in the isotopy class of S inXt\Nf (t)(∆), which is globally gt-least area among