a very special form. In particular, this is enough to imply that T exists as the image of a map from S toM , and we may extend the isotopy F :S× [0, 1)→ M to a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M withT =F (S, 1). By a tangent cone we mean the following: at each point p∈ T∩ Γ, consider the pair of metric spaces (Ns(p),T s(p)) whereTs(p) is the intersection Ts = T∩ Ns(p). W e rescale the metric on this pair by the factor 1/s . Then we claim that this sequence of (rescaled) pairs of metric spaces converge in th e Gromov-Hausdorff sense to a limit (B,C ) where B is the unit ball in Euclidean 3-space, and C is the cone (to the origin) over a great bigon in the unit sphere. Here by a great bigon we mean the union of two spherical geodesics joining antipod al points in the sphere. In fact we do not quite show that T has this structure, but rather that each local branch of T has this structure. Here we are thinking of the map F (·, 1) : S→ M whose image is T , and by “local branch” we mean the image of a regular neigborhood of a point preimage. Lemma 1.27 (T angent cone). LetT be as constructed in Lemma 1.24. Let p∈ T∩ Γ. Then near p, T is a (topologically immersed) surface, each local branch of which has a well–deﬁned tangent cone, which is the cone on a great bigon. Proof. W e use what is essentially a curve–shortening argument. For each small s, deﬁne Ts =∂N s(p)∩ T SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 15 For each point q∈ T\Γ, we deﬁne α (q) to be the angle between the tangent space to T at q, and the radial geodesic through q emanating from p. By the coarea formula, we can calculate area(T∩ Ns(p)) = ∫ s 0 ∫ Tt 1 cos(α )dldt≥ ∫ s 0 length(Tt)dt wheredl denotes the length element in each Tt. Note that this estimate implies thatTt is rectiﬁable for a.e. t. W e chooses to be such a rectiﬁable value. Now , each component τ of Ts is a limit of components τi of Sti∩ ∂N s(p) for largei. By 2–incompressibility of the Sti , each τi is a loop bounding a subdisk Di ofSti for largei. Now ,∂N s(p) is convex in the hyperbolic metric, though not necessarily i n the gt metric. By cutting out the disks ∂N s(p)∩ Nr(1− t)(Γ) and replacing them with the disks D± orthogonal to Γ which are totally geodesic in both the gt and the hyperbolic metrics, we can approximate ∂N s(p) by a surface ∂B bounding a ball B⊂ Ns(p) which is convex in the gs metric for all s≥ t. The ball B is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Ns(p) D±Γ B FIGURE 1. The ball B has boundary which is convex in both the hyperbolic and the gs metrics for all s≥ t Note that after liftingB to the universal cover, there is a retraction ontoB which is length non-increasing, in both the gt and the hyperbolic metric. This retraction projects along the ﬁbers of the product structure on Nr(1− t)(Γ) toD± , and outside Nr(1− t)(Γ), it is the nearest point projection to ∂B\D± . Letτ′ i be the component ofSti∩∂B approximatingτi, and letD′ i be the subdisk ofSti which it bounds. Then the disk D′ i must be contained in B, or else we could decrease its gt and hyperbolic area by the retraction described above. The disk sD′ i converge to the componentD⊂ T ′ bounded by τ, and the hyperbolic areas of the D′ i converge to the hyperbolic area of D. Note that B as above is really shorthand for Bt, since it depends on a choice of t. Similarly we have τt andDt. Since the component Dt⊂ T ′ bounded by τt is contained inBt for allt, the component D⊂ T ′ bounded byτ⊂ ∂N s is contained 16 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI inNs, since Bt→ Ns ast→ 1. So we can, and do, work with Ns(p) instead of B in the sequel. Now , letD′ be the cone on τ to the point p. D′ can be perturbed an arbitrarily small amount to an embedded disk D′′, and therefore by comparing D′′with the D′ i, we see that the hyperbolic area ofD′ must be at least as large as that ofD. Note that this perturbation can be taken to move D′ off Γ, and can be approximated by perturbations which miss Γ. Similar facts are true for all the perturbations we consider in the sequel. Since this is true for each componentτ ofTs, by abuse of notation we can replace T by the component of T∩ Ns(p) bounded by a single mapped in circle τ. This will be the local “branch” of the topologically immersed sur face T . W e use this notational convention for the remainder of the proof of the l emma. Note that the inequality above still holds. It follows that we must have area(T∩ Ns(p))≤ ∫ s 0 length(Ts) sinh(t) sinh(s)dt = area(cone onTs) Now , for each sphere∂N s(p), we letφ be the projection, along hyperbolic geodesics, to the unit sphere S2 in the tangent space at p. For each t∈ (0, 1], deﬁne ∥Tt∥ = length(φ(Tt)) = length(Tt) sinh(t) It follows from the inequalities above that for some interme diate s′ we must have ∥Ts′∥≤∥ Ts∥ with equality iff T∩ Ns(p) is equal to the cone on Ts. Now , the cone onTs is not locally least area for the hyperbolic metric inNs(p)\Γ unlessTs is a great circle or geodesic bigon in ∂N s(p) (with endpoints on∂N s(p)∩ Γ), in which case the lemma is proved. T o see this, just observe that a cone has vanishing principal curvature in the radial direction, so its m ean curvature vanishes iff it is totally geodesic away from Γ. So we may suppose that for any s there is some s′< ssuch that∥Ts′∥ <∥Ts∥. Therefore we choose a sequence of valuessi withsi→ 0 such that∥Tsi∥>∥Tsi+1∥, such that∥Tsi∥ converges to the inﬁmal value of∥Tt∥ witht∈ (0,s ], and such that ∥Tsi∥ is the minimal value of∥Tt∥ on the intervalt∈ [si, 1]. Note that for any small t, the cone on Tt has area area(cone onTt) = t 2 length(Tt) +O(t3) = t2 2∥Tt∥ +O(t3) The set of loops in the sphere with length bounded above by som e constant, parameterized by arclength, is compact, by the Arzela–Ascoli theorem, and so we can suppose that the φ(Tsi ) converge in the Hausdorff sense to a loop C⊂ S2. Claim. C is a geodesic bigon. Proof. W e suppose not, and will obtain a contradiction. W e ﬁx notation: for each i, let Ci denote the inverse image φ − 1(C) under φ : ∂N si(p)→ S2. So Ci is a curve in ∂N si(p). By the cone on Ci we mean the union of the hyperbolic geodesic segments in Nsi(p) fromCi top. By the cone on C we mean the union of the