Euclidean onNr(1− t)/ 2, and which have curvature pinched between− 1 and 0, and are rotationally and translationally symmetric along the core geodesic. Then we let Tt be the surface obtained by shrinkwrapping S with respect to the jt metric. I.e. we let gs,t be a family of metrics as in Deﬁnition 1.17 which agree with thejt metric outsideNr(1− t)(1− s), construct minimal surfacesSs,t as in Lemma 1.20, and so on, limiting to the immersed surface Tt which is minimal for the jt metric on M\Γ, and C1+1/ 2 alongTt∩ Γ. Arguing locally as above, we see that small subsurfaces of Tt contained in the Euclidean tubes Nr(1− t)/ 2 satisfy Gauss–Bonnet in the complement of the coincidence set. By Lemma 1.2, the surfacesTt all have curvature bounded above by 0, and bounded above by− 1 outsideNr(1− t). By Gauss–Bonnet for geodesic triangles, Tt is CAT(0), and actually CAT(− 1) outsideNr(1− t). Now take the limit as t→ 1. Some subsequence of the surfaces Tt converges to a limit which by abuse of notation we denote T . Note that this is not necessarily SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 23 the same as the surface T constructed in previous sections, but it enjoys the same properties. Again, by Gauss–Bonnet for geodesic triangles , the limit is actually CAT(− 1), and the lemma is proved. □ This completes the proof of Theorem 1.10. Problem 1.35. Develop a simplicial or PL theory of shrinkwrapping. Remark 1.36. Since this paper appeared in preprint form, Soma has develop ed some elements of a PL theory of shrinkwrapping; see [Som]. Th is theory proves a PL analogue of Theorem 1.10. 2. T HE MAIN CONSTRUCTION LEMMA The purpose of this section is to state the main construction Lemma 2.3 and show how it follows easily from Theorem 1.10. 2.1. Shrinkwrapping in covers. Let N be a complete, orientable, parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in N , just as in the statement of Theorem 1.10. For the purposes of introducing the Main Construction Lemma, we will assume t hatN has a single endE. W e consider the family of gt and gs,t metrics, as in Deﬁnition 1.17 and Lemma 1.34. Suppose there is an embedded surface ∂W inN\Γ which separates off the end ofN from a compact submanifold W⊂ N . Let X be a covering space of W (possibly inﬁnite). The preimage of the geodesics Γ are a collection of locally ﬁnite geodesics ˆΓ⊂ X, some of which might be ﬁnite, and some inﬁnite. Let ∆⊂ ˆΓ be some nonempty collection, consisting entirely of simple closed geodesics. Then we can consider a second surface S⊂ X\∆ and can ask whether it is possible to shrinkwrapS rel. ∆. Notice that we cannot directly apply Theorem 1.10 because the hyperbolic manifold X is not complete, and therefore a shrinkwrap representative of S might not exist. However, we note that for each metric gt onN , we get agt locally least area representative ∂W t isotopic to ∂W . The submanifold Wt of N bounded by∂W t lifts to a covering space Xt which is homeomorphic to X. The metricgt pulls back to a metric on Xt which by abuse of notation we also refer to asgt. Then ∂X t which is a lift of ∂W t isgt locally least area, and therefore acts as a barrier surface. It follows that we can ﬁnd, for each t, a surface St in the isotopy class of S inXt\Nf (t)(∆), which is globally gt-least area among all such surfaces (compare with the statement of Lemma 1.20). The theory of shrinkwrapping developed in§1 goes through almost identically for the surfaces St with one important exception: the metric gt on Xt does not agree with the hyperbolic metric away from ∆ and ∂X t, but rather is deformed along the other geodesics ˆΓ\∆. It follows that we should take care to analyze the quality of the surfaces St and their limit S′ near components of ˆΓ\∆. Fortunately the situation is as simple as it could be: Lemma 2.1 (Superﬂuous geodesics invisible). With notation and deﬁnitions as above, in a neighborhood of a point p on ˆΓ\∆, the surface S′ is a locally least area surface for the hyperbolic metric. 24 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Proof. Suppose not. Then there is a compactly supported perturbati on F of S′ which agrees with S′ outside a ﬁxed neighborhood of p, and which has strictly less hyperbolic area thanS′, so that area(S′)− area(F )≥ ǫ for some positive constant ǫ. After another small perturbation of F toF ′, which can be taken to increase the hyperbolic area as little as requ ired, we can assume thatF ′ is transverse to Γ nearp, intersecting it in n points for some ﬁnite n, and satisfying area(S′)− area(F ′)≥ ǫ/ 2 By property (3) of the gt metric (see Lemma 1.18) the gt area ofF ′ is at most equal to the hyperbolic area plus nC(1− t)2, for some constant C independent of t. For sufﬁciently smallt, nC(1− t)2<ǫ/ 2 and therefore the gt area of F ′ is less than the hyperbolic area of S′, which is less than the gt area of S′, thereby contradicting the global gt minimality of S′ in its isotopy class in Xt\Nf (t)(∆). This contradiction proves the lemma. □ A similar argument holds for the gt,s metric in place of the gt metric, and therefore by means of Lemma 2.1 we can shrinkwrap in covers, obtain ing CAT (− 1) surfaces in the limit. Remark 2.2. One should think of Lemma 2.1 as a kind of “removable singular ity” theorem for transverse obstacles. Compare with the followi ng physical experiment: one knows from experience that very thin needles can be pushed through soap bubbles without popping them or distorting their geome try . (Try it!) 2.2. The main construction lemma. W e now state and prove the main construction lemma. The context of this Lemma is the same as that of §2.1: we want to shrinkwrap a certain surface in a cover, using the boundary o f that cover as a barrier surface. See Figure 3 for an idealized depiction of T ′ andS inW andX in the case thatW is a handlebody . Lemma 2.3 (Main construction lemma). LetE be an end of the complete open orientable parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold N with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Let W⊂ N be a submanifold such that ∂W∩ int(N ) separatesW fromE. Let ∆1⊂ N\∂W be a ﬁnite collection of simple closed geodesics with ∆ = int(W )∩ ∆1 a non–empty proper subset of ∆1. Suppose further that ∂W is 2–incompressible rel. ∆. LetG be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(W ), and let X be the covering space of W corresponding to G. Let Σ be the preimage of ∆ inX, and ˆ∆⊂ Σ a subset which maps homeomorphically onto ∆ under the covering projection, and let B⊂ ˆ∆ be a nonempty union of geodesics. Suppose there exists an embedded closed surface S ⊂ X\B that is 2–incompressible rel.B inX, which separates every component of