other surface with these properties, then area (T )≤ area(T ′) We say that T is obtained from S by shrinkwrapping rel. Γ, or if Γ is understood, T is obtained fromS by shrinkwrapping. In fact, we prove the stronger result that T is Γ–minimal (to be deﬁned in §1) which implies in particular that it is intrinsically CAT (− 1) Here is the main technical result of this paper. Theorem 0.9. LetE be an end of the complete orientable hyperbolic 3-manifold N with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Let C be a 3-dimensional compact core of N ,∂EC the component of ∂C facingE andg = genus(∂EC). If there exists a sequence of closed geodesics exitingE, then there exists a sequence{Si} of CAT(− 1) surfaces of genusg exitingE such that each{Si} is homologically separating inE. That is, each Si homologically separates∂EC fromE. Theorem 0.4 can now be deduced from Theorem 0.9 and Souto [So] ; however, we prove that Theorem 0.9 implies Theorem 0.4 using only 3-ma nifold topology and elementary hyperbolic geometry . The proof of Theorem 0.9 blends elementary aspects of minima l surface theory , hyperbolic geometry , and 3-manifold topology . The method will be demonstrated 4 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI in§4 where we give a proof of Canary’s theorem. The ﬁrst time read er is urged to begin with that section. This paper is organized as follows. In §1 and§2 we establish the shrinkwrapping technique for ﬁnding CAT (− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In §3 we prove the existence of ǫ-separated simple geodesics exiting the end of parabolic free manifolds. In§4 we prove Canary’s theorem. This proof will model the proof of the general case. The general strategy will be outlined at the end of that section. In§5 we develop the topological theory of end reductions in 3-ma nifolds. In§6 we give the proofs of our main results. In §7 we give the necessary embellishments of our methods to state and prove our results in the case of manif olds with parabolic cusps. Notation 0.10. IfX⊂ Y , then N (X) denotes a regular neighborhood of X inY and int(X) denotes the interior of X. If X is a topological space, then|X|denotes the number of components ofX. IfA,B are topological subspaces of a third space, thenA\B denotes the intersection of A with the complement of B. Acknowledgements 0.11. The ﬁrst author is grateful to Nick Makarov for some useful analytic discussions. The second author is grateful to Michael Freedman for many long conversations in Fall 1996 which introduced him to the T ame Ends conjecture. He thanks Francis Bonahon, Y air Minsky and Jeff Bro ck for their interest and helpful comments. Part of this research was carried out w hile he was visiting Nara W omen’s University , the T echnion and the Institute forAdvanced Study . He thanks them for their hospitality . W e thank the referees for their many thoughtful suggestions and comments. 1. S HRINKWRAPPING In this section, we introduce a new technical tool for ﬁnding CAT(− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3–manifolds, called shrinkwrapping. Roughly speaking, given a collection of simple closed geodesics Γ in a hyperbolic 3–manifoldM and an embedded surface S⊂ M\Γ, a surface T ⊂ M is obtained from S by shrinkwrappingS rel. Γ if it homotopic to S, can be approximated by an isotopy from S supported inM\Γ, and is least area subject to these constraints. Given mild topological conditions on M, Γ,S (namely 2–incompressibility , to be deﬁned below) the shrinkwrapped surface exists, and is CA T(− 1) with respect to the path metric induced by the Riemannian metric on M . W e use some basic analytical tools throughout this section,including the Gauss– Bonnet formula, the coarea formula, and the Arzela–Ascoli t heorem. At a number of points we must invoke results from the literature to estab lish existence of minimal surfaces ([MSY]), existence of limits with area and cur vature control ([CiSc]), and regularity of the shrinkwrapped surfaces along Γ ([Ri],[Fre]). General references are [CM], [Js] [Fed] and [B]. 1.1. Geometry of surfaces. For convenience, we state some elementary but fundamental lemmas concerning curvature of (smooth) surfaces in Riemannian 3manifolds. W e use the following standard terms to refer to different kin ds of minimal surfaces: Deﬁnition 1.1. A smooth surface Σ in a Riemannian 3-manifold is minimal if it is a critical point for area with respect to all smooth compactl y supported variations. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 5 It is locally least area (also called stable) if it is a local minimum for area with respect to all smooth, compactly supported variations. A closed, em bedded surface is globally least area if it is an absolute minimum for area amongst all smooth surfa ces in its isotopy class. Note that we do not require that our minimal or locally least a rea surfaces are complete. Any subsurface of a globally least area surface is locally le ast area, and a locally least area surface is minimal. A smooth surface is minimal if f its mean curvature vector ﬁeld vanishes identically . For more details, consult [CM], especially chapter 5. The intrinsic curvature of a minimal surface is controlled b y the geometry of the ambient manifold. The following lemma is formula 5.6 on p age 100 of [CM]. Lemma 1.2 (Monotonicity of curvature) . Let Σ be a minimal surface in a Riemannian manifoldM . Let KΣ denote the curvature of Σ, and KM the sectional curvature of M . Then restricted to the tangent space T Σ, KΣ =KM− 1 2|A|2 whereA denotes the second fundamental form of Σ. In particular, if the Riemannian curvature onM is bounded from above by some constantK, then the curvature of a minimal surface Σ inM is also bounded above byK. The following lemma is just the usual Gauss–Bonnet formula: Lemma 1.3 (Gauss–Bonnet formula). Let Σ be aC3 Riemannian surface with (possibly empty)C3 boundary ∂Σ. Let KΣ denote the Gauss curvature of Σ, and κ the geodesic curvature along∂Σ. Then ∫ Σ KΣ = 2πχ (Σ)− ∫ ∂ Σ κdl Many simple proofs exist in the literature. For example, see [Js]. If∂Σ is merely piecewise C3, with ﬁnitely many corners pi and external angles α i, the Gauss–Bonnet formula must be modiﬁed as follows: Lemma 1.4 (Gauss–Bonnet with corners) . Let Σ be a C3 Riemannian surface with boundary∂Σ which is piecewiseC3, and has external angles α i at ﬁnitely many pointspi. LetKΣ andκ be as above. Then∫ Σ KΣ = 2πχ (Σ)− ∫ ∂ Σ κdl− ∑ i α i Observe forabc a geodesic triangle with external anglesα 1,α 2,α 3 that Lemma 1.4 implies ∫ abc K = 2π− ∑ i α i Notice that the geodesic curvature κ vanishes precisely when ∂Σ is a geodesic, that is, a critical point for the length functional. More gen erally , letν be the normal bundle of ∂Σ in Σ, oriented so that the inward unit normal is a positive sectio n. The exponential map restricted to ν deﬁnes a map φ :∂Σ× [0,ǫ ]→ Σ 6 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI for small ǫ, where φ(·, 0)