make up N . In other words, if N decomposes into 3-chainsCk, we have vol(X,Y ) ≤ ∑ Ck⊂ N massf ǫ (Ck) =: massf ǫ (N ). Thus, Theorem 5.1 will follow from the following proposition. Proposition 5.8. Given S there are constants K3 > 1 and K4 > 0 so that the map fǫ is properly homotopic to a map fǫ θ : N → N ǫ(C(X,Y )) for which massf ǫ θ (N ) ≤ K3dP(PX,P Y ) +K4. Let V3 denote the maximal volume of a tetrahedron in hyperbolic 3-space ( see [Th1, ch. 7], [BP]). We begin our approach to Proposition 5.8 with the fo llowing lemma. Lemma 5.9. There is a constant K∆ so that the map fǫ is properly homotopic to a map fǫ θ that also satisﬁes the conclusions of Theorem 5.7 so that massf ǫ θ (N∆)<K ∆ · V3 ·dP(PX,P Y ) + 1. Proof: Because of the possibility of a large number of Dehn twist blocks in N∆, there is not in general a uniform constant K for which the number of tetrahedra used to triangulate N∆ is less than Kd P(PX,P Y ). We will show, however, that by modifying fǫ by a homotopy, we can force the tetrahedra that lie in Dehn twist blocks to have mass as small as we like. By Theorem 5.7, the number of blocks in N∆ that are not Dehn twist blocks is bounded by 3dP(PX,P Y ). Since there is a uniform bound to the number of tetrahedra in any block, there is a constant K∆ so that all but at most K∆dP(PX,P Y ) tetrahedra of N∆ lie in Dehn twist blocks. Let α ∗ ∈ spin(G) be a spinning geodesic. Let fǫ θ be deﬁned by the following homotopy of fǫ through maps that are simplicial on N∆: for each α ∈ ∪ jPj, slide the vertices pα and ¯pα along the geodesic α ∗ a distance θ 2πℓQ(X,Y )(α ∗ ) in the direction of the reference orientation chosen for α . (See [Th2] for another example of this spinning of triangulations). The following lemma shows that tetrahedra that lie in a Dehn twist block, which we will call Dehn twist tetrahedra , can be made to have small fǫ θ -mass by spinning to suﬃciently high values of θ. Lemma 5.10. If ∆ ⊂ N∆ is a Dehn twist tetrahedron, then massf ǫ θ (∆) → 0 as θ → ∞ . Proof: Recall from Theorem 5.7, each Dehn twist tetrahedron ∆ has at leas t one edge e for which fǫ(e) ⊂ α ∗ for some spinning geodesic α ∗ . THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 35 Lift fǫ θ to ˜fǫ θ : ˜N → ˜H3 and choose a lift ˜∆ to ˜N . Let ˜α ∗ denote the lift of α ∗ to H3 for which ˜fǫ θ sends the lifted edge ˜e ⊂ ˜∆ to ˜α ∗ . Let e′ be the opposite edge of ∆ (e and e′ have no endpoints in common). Let Iθ be the ideal tetrahedron in H3 for which (1) ˜fǫ θ (˜e′) lies in one edge e′ ∞ of Iθ , (2) the two other edges e1 ∞ and e2 ∞ of Iθ emanating from one endpoint of e′ ∞ pass through endpoints p1 and p2 of ˜fǫ θ (˜e). The image ˜fǫ θ ( ˜∆) lies in Iθ (see Figure 12). ˜α ∗ Iθ ˜fǫ θ ( ˜∆) θ e′ ∞ p2p1 10 H3 Figure 12. Spinning tetrahedra in H3. Normalize by an isometry of H3 so that the edge e′ ∞ ofIθ has its ideal endpoints at 0 and ∞ , and so that the terminal ﬁxed point of ˜α ∗ (with respect to the reference orientation for α ) lies at 1 ∈ C. Then for any r >0 there exists a θ so that the two ideal vertices of Iθ that do not lie at 0 and ∞ lie within a small disk |1 − z|< r. It follows that the dihedral angle of Iθ at e′ ∞ tends to 0 as θ → ∞ . But the volume of an ideal tetrahedron tends to 0 as any of its dihedral angles tends to 0, so we have massf ǫ θ (∆)< vol(Iθ ) → 0 as θ → ∞ . Continuation of the proof of Lemma 5.9: By Lemma 5.10, for any Dehn twist block B, the quantity mass f ǫ θ (B) is as small as we like for θ suﬃciently large. If Btw denotes the union of all Dehn twist blocks in N∆, then, we may choose θ suﬃciently large so that massf ǫ θ (Btw)< 1. Since fǫ θ is simplicial on N∆, we have massf ǫ θ (∆)< V3 36 JEFFREY F. BROCK for any tetrahedron ∆ ⊂ N∆, and since all but at most K∆dP(PX,P Y ) tetrahedra inN∆ lie in Btw, we have massf ǫ θ (N∆)<K ∆ · V3 ·dP(PX,P Y ) + 1. Bounding the volume of the caps. The bound on the fǫ θ -mass of the triangulated part N∆ in terms of the distance dP(PX,P Y ) will be suﬃcient for Proposition 5.8 once we show the following uniform bound on the fǫ θ -mass of the caps of N . Lemma 5.11. There is a uniform constant Kcap, depending only on S so that after modifyingfǫ θ by a homotopy on capX we have massf ǫ θ (capX )<K cap and similarly for capY . Proof: Our goal will be to modify the homotopy fǫ θ |capX from ∂ − Nǫ(C(X,Y )) to the simplicial hyperbolic surface ZX by cutting the surface S into annuli and controlling the trace of the homotopy on each annulus (a solid torus ). To obtain such control, we choose this decomposition compatibly with the pants dec ompositionPX . We ﬁx attention on a single pair of pants ˆS ⊂ S − PX . By a ﬁgure-8 curve on ˆS we will mean a closed curve that intersects itself once on ˆS and divides ˆS into three annuli, one parallel to each boundary component of ˆS (see Figure 13). To prove Lemma 5.11 we establish the following basic lemma in hyperbolic surface g eometry. (We continue to treat the closed case; the case when S has boundary is similar). Lemma 5.12. Let S a closed surface with negative Euler characteristic, and le t L′ ≥ L be a constant greater than or equal to the Bers constant L forS. Then there is a constant L8(L′)> 0 so that the following holds: if P is a pants decomposition of S, Z ∈ Singk(S) is a possibly singular hyperbolic surface, and the length bo und ℓZ(α ) < L′ holds for each α ∈ P , then any ﬁgure- 8 curve γ in any component ˆS ⊂ S − P satisﬁes ℓZ(γ)<L 8(L′). Figure 13. A ﬁgure eight curve. THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 37 Proof: Note that any bound on the geodesic length of a given ﬁgure-8 curv e γ guarantees a bound on the geodesic length of any other, by