all such surfaces (compare with the statement of Lemma 1.20). The theory of shrinkwrapping developed in§1 goes through almost identically for the surfaces St with one important exception: the metric gt on Xt does not agree with the hyperbolic metric away from ∆ and ∂X t, but rather is deformed along the other geodesics ˆΓ\∆. It follows that we should take care to analyze the quality of the surfaces St and their limit S′ near components of ˆΓ\∆. Fortunately the situation is as simple as it could be: Lemma 2.1 (Superﬂuous geodesics invisible). With notation and deﬁnitions as above, in a neighborhood of a point p on ˆΓ\∆, the surface S′ is a locally least area surface for the hyperbolic metric. 24 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Proof. Suppose not. Then there is a compactly supported perturbati on F of S′ which agrees with S′ outside a ﬁxed neighborhood of p, and which has strictly less hyperbolic area thanS′, so that area(S′)− area(F )≥ ǫ for some positive constant ǫ. After another small perturbation of F toF ′, which can be taken to increase the hyperbolic area as little as requ ired, we can assume thatF ′ is transverse to Γ nearp, intersecting it in n points for some ﬁnite n, and satisfying area(S′)− area(F ′)≥ ǫ/ 2 By property (3) of the gt metric (see Lemma 1.18) the gt area ofF ′ is at most equal to the hyperbolic area plus nC(1− t)2, for some constant C independent of t. For sufﬁciently smallt, nC(1− t)2<ǫ/ 2 and therefore the gt area of F ′ is less than the hyperbolic area of S′, which is less than the gt area of S′, thereby contradicting the global gt minimality of S′ in its isotopy class in Xt\Nf (t)(∆). This contradiction proves the lemma. □ A similar argument holds for the gt,s metric in place of the gt metric, and therefore by means of Lemma 2.1 we can shrinkwrap in covers, obtain ing CAT (− 1) surfaces in the limit. Remark 2.2. One should think of Lemma 2.1 as a kind of “removable singular ity” theorem for transverse obstacles. Compare with the followi ng physical experiment: one knows from experience that very thin needles can be pushed through soap bubbles without popping them or distorting their geome try . (Try it!) 2.2. The main construction lemma. W e now state and prove the main construction lemma. The context of this Lemma is the same as that of §2.1: we want to shrinkwrap a certain surface in a cover, using the boundary o f that cover as a barrier surface. See Figure 3 for an idealized depiction of T ′ andS inW andX in the case thatW is a handlebody . Lemma 2.3 (Main construction lemma). LetE be an end of the complete open orientable parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold N with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Let W⊂ N be a submanifold such that ∂W∩ int(N ) separatesW fromE. Let ∆1⊂ N\∂W be a ﬁnite collection of simple closed geodesics with ∆ = int(W )∩ ∆1 a non–empty proper subset of ∆1. Suppose further that ∂W is 2–incompressible rel. ∆. LetG be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(W ), and let X be the covering space of W corresponding to G. Let Σ be the preimage of ∆ inX, and ˆ∆⊂ Σ a subset which maps homeomorphically onto ∆ under the covering projection, and let B⊂ ˆ∆ be a nonempty union of geodesics. Suppose there exists an embedded closed surface S ⊂ X\B that is 2–incompressible rel.B inX, which separates every component of B from∂X . Then∂W can be homotoped to a ∆1–minimal surface which, by abuse of notation, we call∂W ′, and the map of S intoN given by the covering projection is homotopic to a map whose image T ′ is ∆1–minimal. Also, ∂W ′ (resp. T ′) can be perturbed by an arbitrarily small perturbation to be an embedded (resp. smoothly immers ed) surface ∂W t (resp. Tt) boundingWt with the following properties: SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 25 (1) There exists an isotopy from ∂W to ∂W t which never crosses ∆1, and which induces an isotopy from W toWt, and a corresponding deformation of hyperbolic manifoldsX toXt which ﬁxes Σ pointwise. (2) There exists an isotopy from S toSt⊂ Xt which never crosses B, such that Tt is the projection of St toN . W T ′ ⊂ W S ⊂ X FIGURE 3. The surfaces T ′ andS inW andX respectively Proof. The proof is reasonably straightforward, given the work in §1 and §2.1. First, we obtain∂W ′ from∂W by shrinkwrapping rel. ∆1. Since ∆ = int(W )∩ ∆1 is a nonempty and proper subset of ∆1, ∂W satisﬁes the hypotheses of Theorem 1.10, and therefore ∂W ′ exists, and satisﬁes the desired properties. 26 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI For each t = ti in our approximating sequence, the metric gt on Wt lifts to a metric onXt which, by abuse of notation, we also call gt. Then with respect to thegt metric,∂X t acts as a barrier surface, and we can ﬁnd a gt locally least area surface St ⊂ int(Xt) which is gt globally least area in the isotopy class of S inXt\Nf (t)(B), by [MSY], just as in the proof of Lemma 1.20. Note thatS is necessarily homologically essential inXt\Nf (t)(B), since it separates each component of B from∂X t by hypothesis, and therefore any surface isotopic toS inXt\Nf (t)(B) must intersect a ﬁxed compact arc α fromB to∂X t. The immersed surfaces Tt⊂ N are obtained by mapping St toWt by the covering projection. After passing to a further subsequence of valuest =ti, the limit of the Tt surfaces exists as a map from S toN , with image T ′, by the argument of Lemma 1.24 applied locally . The regularity ofT ′ locally along ∆1 follows from the argument of Lemma 1.31, since that argument is completely lo cal. As in Lemma 1.34, we can repeat the construction above with th egs,t metrics and obtain a limit T ′ with the desired regularity . It follows that T ′ is ∆1–minimal. Notice that some local sheets of T ′ are actually minimal (in the hyperbolic metric) near geodesics in ∆1, corresponding to subsets ofSt inXt crossing components of Σ\B, by Lemma 2.1. In any case, T ′ is intrinsically CAT(− 1), and the theorem is proved. □ 2.3. Nonsimple geodesics. When we come to consider hyperbolic manifolds with parabolics, we need to treat the case that the geodesics ∆1 might not be simple. But there is a standard trick to reduce this case to the simple cas e, at the cost of slightly perturbing the hyperbolic metric. Explicitly , suppose Γ⊂ M is as in the statement of Theorem 1.10 except that some of the components are possibly not simple. Then for ever yǫ> 0 there exists a perturbation g of the hyperbolic metric on M in a neighborhood of Γ with the following properties: (1) The new metric g agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Nǫ(Γ) (2) With respect to the metric g, the curves in