is isomorphic to the submodule of M generated by a1 − a2 anda2 − a3. Moreover, M/N is a trivial G-module. By corollary 5.4 we have that CL(M/N ) is discriminant negligible and so the result follows by lemma 5.3. Similarly, suppose K is a quartic ﬁeld whose normal closure ˜K has S4 Galois group over Q. There are 3 subgroups of S4 of order 8, all conjugate and isomorphic to dihedral group with 8 elements D4. Pick one of these, and let F be its ﬁxed ﬁeld. F is called the cubic resolvent ﬁeld of K. We have the following result relating 2-torsion in quartic ﬁel ds to 2-torsion in the corresponding cubic resolvents. This result is new as fa r as the author knows: Lemma 6.1. Let K be a quartic ﬁeld, and F be its cubic resolvent. Then the 2-torsion in CL(K) and in CL(F ) are the same up to a factor of size Oǫ(Dǫ K ). Proof. Let L be the Galois closure of K and assume for simplicity that G = Gal(L/ Q) ≈ S4. Let M and N be the G-module corresponding to CL(K)[2] and CL(F )[2] respectively. As before, M corresponds to the F2 vector space generated by a1,a 2,a 3,a 4 with the natural permutation action of S4. We have a 1-dimensional trivial submodule M0 of M generated by a1 +a2 +a3 +a4. Set M1 to be M/M 0. Now, let M2 be the submodule of M1 generated by a1 +a2,a 1 +a3, so that M1/M 2 is a trivial G-module. A basis for N as a module over F2 is given by b1,b 2,b 3 where the S4 action is 16 JACOB TSIMERMAN given by identifying the bi with the right cosets S4/D 4. We have a trivial 1-dim submodule N0 given by b1 +b2 +b3, and N/N 0 ≈ M2 asS4-modules. Now, by applying corollaries 5.3 and 5.4 we get Cl(M ) = Cl(M1) = Cl(M2) = Cl(N/N 0) = Cl(N ) as desired. □ We end this section with some general remarks on torsion in cl ass groups. One expects that all torsion is discriminant negligible. Fo r positive integers n,d , Zhang[18] conjectures the bound (3) Cl(K)[n] ≪ ǫDǫ K asK varies over number ﬁelds of degreed. We can phrase Zhang’s conjecture in our language in the following way: Fix a group G and a ﬁnite G-module M . Now, suppose K is a Galois number ﬁeld with Gal( K/ Q) ≈ G. We can then consider M as a ﬁnite Gal( K/ Q) module. It then makes sense to talk about Cl(M ), leaving K out by abuse of notation. Conjecture 6.1. For all ﬁnite modules M , the function Cl(M ) is discriminant negligible. It is not hard to see that 6.1 is equivalent to Zhang’s conject ure. Zhang’s conjecture is the special case where the module M is the regular representation of G over Z/n Z for some positive integer n. However, since all modules are quotients of direct sums of such regular representation s, the equivalence follows from corollary 5.3. • In light of conjecture 6.1 the result of Gerth and lemma 6.1 mi ght not seem that interesting, since all torsion is supposed to b e Discriminant negligible! In fact, Gerth[6] proves a much more p recise relationship between the 3-torsion group of a cubic ﬁeld and its quadratic resolvent, in terms of ramiﬁcation. By following the proof of theorem 5.1 more closely one can prove that Cl(M ) is well deﬁned up to, roughly speaking, the contribution from the ramiﬁed p rimes in K. Thus, the statement of lemma 6.1 could likely be reﬁned to say that the 2-ranks of a quartic ﬁeld and its cubic resolvent are the same up to ramiﬁed primes. As our main interest is in Galois or bits of CM points, we do not pursue this. • In fact, Brumer and Silverman[1] asked whether the right han d side of (3) can be replaced with D C ln ln DK K . The value D C ln ln DK K can be best understood in terms of the ramiﬁed primes in K. These are precisely the primes dividing DK . Now, for SK denoting the number of distinct primes dividing DK , one can verify nSK ≪ D C ln ln DK K , BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 17 with equality for DK equaling the product of the ﬁrst X primes (X ≈ lnDK ln lnDK ). Thus, for 2-torsion of certain quadratic ﬁelds the bound is tight. • The above methods cannot recover some transfer principles, such as the Scholtz reﬂection principle which relates 3-torsion in the quadratic ﬁelds Q( √ D) and Q( √ − 3D), or the work of Ellenberg and Venkatesh[5]. This is because these principles use heavily class ﬁeld theory, which has not been an input in our work thus far. Nonet heless, one can rephrase and generalize these reﬂection princ iples in this language. 7. Applications to Lower bounds for Galois orbits In this section we apply results of section 5 to the study Galo is orbits of special points in higher rank. Let Ag, 1(C) denote the moduli space for principally polarized complex abelian varieties of dimens ion g. We also let Hg denote the Siegel-Upper half space, so that Ag, 1(C) ≈ GSp2g(Q)\Hg × GSp2g(Af )/GSp 2g(ˆZ). From now on, given a ﬁeld F we refer to the torus ResF/ QGm simply as F ×. Let x be a CM point in Ag, 1 corresponding to a principally polarized Abelian varietyAx. We set Rx to be the center of the ring of endomorphisms End(Ax) of Ax. All of the CM points in Ag, 1(C) are known to be deﬁned over ¯Q, and so admit a natural action of the Galois group Gal( Q/ Q). We recall conjecture 1.1 for the convenience of the reader: Conjecture 7.1. There exists a positive constant δg such that the inequality |Gal( Q/ Q) ·x| ≫ g Disc(Rx)δg holds for all ǫ >0 as x varies over all CM points in Ag, 1. We begin by reviewing the description of the Galois action on A in terms of the CM theory. 7.1. Background on CM theory . Let A be a principally polarized complex CM abelian variety, which we shall take to be simple for t he moment. Then there is a CM ﬁeld K such that End(A) ⊗ Z Q ∼ =K. We let F denote the maximal totally real subﬁeld of K. Moreover, there is a set S = {φ 1,φ 2,...,φ g} of complex embeddings of K such that the representation of K on the complex tangent space of A is given as the direct sum of the 1-dimensional representations induced by S. Moreover, S ∪ ¯S give all embeddings of K into C. Let L denote the normal closure of K and S0 be all the embeddings of L into C which induce an element of S on K. The pair (K,S ) is referred to as the CM type of A. Since A is simple, (K,S ) must be a primitive CM-type,