tangent con e is a planeπ in the tangent space at p. W e show how to choose local co–ordinates in a ballB near each pointp∈ L such thatB∩ Γ is thex–axis, each local sheet of T is the graph of a function u : Ω→ R, and u is non–negative along the x–axis. Let γ = B∩ Γ, and let γ ′ be another geodesic throughp orthogonal to γ and tangent to π . LetF andG be foliations of B by totally geodesic planes orthogonal to γ andγ ′ respectively . Then each leaf of F is totally geodesic for both the hyperbolic and the gt metric for all t, and each leaf ofG is totally geodesic for the gt metric for sufﬁciently large t. It follows that T has no source or sink singularities with respect to either fo liation. Since T∩ B is a (topological) disk, by reasons of Euler characteristic it can have no saddle singularities either, and therefore no singularities at al l. W e letF andG be level sets of two co–ordinate functions on B. Deﬁne a third co–ordinate function to be (signed) hyperbolic distance to the plane containing γ andγ ′, and observe that u is a graph in these co–ordinates. It follows that u solves an instance of the thin obstacle problem, and by Theorem 1.28 or by [Fre] or [K] the desired regularity of du follows. □ SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 21 Remark 1.32. The structure of the coincidence set is important to underst and, and it has been studied by various authors. Hans Lewy [Lew] showe d that for J the Dirichlet integral andψ analytic, the coincidence set is a ﬁnite union of points and intervals. Athanasopoulos [Ath] proved the same result for the minimal surface question, for symmetric domain Ω and obstacleA, but his (very short and elegant) proof relies fundamentally on the symmetry of the problem, a nd we do not see how it applies in our context. Note that if the Hausdorff dimension of the coincidence set i s strictly< 1, then sinceT isC1+1/ 2 (and therefore Lipschitz) along this coincidence set, the t heory of removable singularities implies that T is actually real analytic along Γ. It follows in this case that the coincidence set consists of a ﬁnite unio n of isolated points, and thatT is actually a minimal surface. See e.g. [Car] for details. Remark 1.33. Existence results for the thin obstacle problem for minimal surfaces with analytic obstacles (see e.g. [Ri], [K], [N]) gives an al ternative proof of the existence of the limit T . Given S, we can shrinkwrap S near Γ in small balls by using existence for the thin obstacle problem, and away from Γ by replacing small disks with least area embedded disks with the same boundary . The argument of [HS] implies that for S 2–incompressible, this converges to a surface T . 1.8. CAT(− 1) property . W e have shown that T satisﬁes all the properties of the conclusion of Theorem 1.10, except that we have not yet shown that it is intrinsically CAT(− 1). In this subsection we show that after possibly replacing T by a new surface with the same properties, we can insist thatT is CAT(− 1) with respect to the path metric induced from M . Lemma 1.34 (CAT(-1) property). After possibly replacingT by a new immersed surface with the same properties, T is CAT(− 1) with respect to the path metric induced from M . Proof. T o show thatT is CAT(− 1) we will show that there is no distributional positive curvature concentrated along the coincidence set L. Since T\Γ is a minimal surface, the curvature of T is bounded above by − 1 on this subset. It will follow by Gauss–Bonnet that T is CAT(− 1). W e ﬁrst treat a simpler problem in Euclidean 3–space, which we denote by R3. Let Σ be an embedded surface in R3 which is C3 outside a subset X which is contained in a geodesic γ in R3, and which is C1 alongX from either side along the interior of X, and C1 at non–interior points of X. Then we claim, for each subsurfaceR⊂ Σ withC3 boundary∂R⊂ Σ\X, that ∫ R\ X KΣ = 2πχ (R)− ∫ ∂R κdl Compare Lemma 1.3. In other words, we want to show that X is a “removable singularity” for R, at least with respect to the Gauss–Bonnet formula. Letφ : R\X→ S2 denote the Gauss map, which takes each point p∈ R to its unit normal, in the unit sphere of S2. Then KΣ is the pullback of the area form by φ. Let R denote the completion of R\X with respect to the path metric. Then R is obtained from R by cutting it open along each interval in R∩ X, and sewing in two copies of the interval thereby removed. Notice that ther e is a natural forgetful mapR→ R. 22 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI By the assumptions about the regularity ofR, the Gauss mapφ actually extends to a continuous mapφ :R→ S2. Moreover, since X is contained in a geodesic γ of R3, the image φ(R\R) is contained in a great circle C inS2. For each boundary component τ ofR, we claim that the map φ : τ→ C has degree zero. For, otherwise, by a degree argument, there are pointsp± ∈ R which map to the same point in p, for which φ(p+) = −φ(p− ), and the graphs of φ(p+) and−φ(p− ) locally have a nonzero algebraic intersection number. It fo llows that the local sheets of R from either side must actually intersect along p, contrary to the fact that Σ is embedded. It follows that we can sew in a disk to R along each boundary component to get a surface R ′ homeomorphic toR, with∂R ′ =∂R , and extendφ toφ :R ′ → S2 by mapping each such disk into C. Now , the surfaceR ′ can be perturbed slightly in a neighborhood of X to a new surfaceR ′′ which isC3 in R3, in such a way that the Gauss map of R ′′ is a perturbation ofφ. So the usual Gauss–Bonnet formula (Lemma 1.3) shows that ∫ R′′ K = 2πχ (R)− ∫ ∂R κdl But ∫ R ′′K is just the integral of the area form on S2 pulled back by the Gauss map; it follows that ∫ R ′′ K = ∫ S2 degree(φ(R ′ )) and ∫ S2 degree(φ(R ′′ )) = ∫ S2 degree(φ(R ′ )) since one map is obtained from the other by a small perturbati on supported away from the boundary . Since the measure ofC is zero, this last integral is just equal to ∫ S2\ C degree(φ(R ′ )) = ∫ R\ X K and the claim is proved. Now we show how to apply this to our shrinkwrapped surface T . W e use the following trick. Let jt with t∈ [0, 1) be a family of metrics on M , conformally equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, which agree with the hy perbolic metric outsideNr(1− t), which are