shown in the proof of theorem 5.1. We now analyze the seco nd term ˆOL/U L. Consider the exact sequence 1 → Hom(X(T ),UL) → T (AL,f )c → Hom(X(T ), ˆOL/U L) → 1. TakingG-invariants gives us the exact sequences 1 → T (Q)∩T (ˆZ) → T (ˆZ) → HomG(X(T ), ˆOL/U L) → H 1(Hom(X(T ),UL)) and H 1(Hom(X(T ),UL)) → H 1(T (AL,f )c) → H 1(Hom(X(T ), ˆOL/U L)) → H 2(Hom(X(T ),U (L))). AsUL is a ﬁnitely generated abelian group of rank bounded by the de gree ofL, all its cohomology groups are of bounded cardinality. The t heorem thus follows from the following lemma: Lemma 5.6. The cohomology group H 1(T ( ˆOL)) is ﬁnite and discriminant negligible. Proof. Note that we have the decomposition H 1(T ( ˆOL)) ∼ = ⊕ vH 1(T (OL,v )). Let v be a place lying over a ﬁnite prime p such that it is unramiﬁed. Then by local class ﬁeld theory, OL,v is a cohomologically trivial module, and thus by Nakayama ([8], Th. 2) H 1(T (OL,v )) is trivial. If v is ramiﬁed, consider the exact sequence 1 → T (OL,v ) → T (Lv) → X(T )∗ → 1. By Nakayama-Tate duality, the cohomology groups of T (Lv) are bounded in terms of the degree of L. By looking at the associated long exact sequence, It thus follows that the same holds for T (OLv ). Let S be the set of primes ramiﬁed in L. The lemma now follows from the fact that 2 |S| is discriminant negligible. □ □ We have the following corollary to the groups CL(M ): Corollary 5.7. Let M be a ﬁnite module of the galois group Gal ( Q/ Q), which factors through the galois group G of a number ﬁeld L. Let M ∗ denote the dual module Hom(M, Q/ Z). Then up to discriminant negligible factors, we have the equality CL(M ) = |HomG(M ∗,CL (L))|. BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 15 Proof. Letφ :T → S be a map of isogenous tori that split over L such that the cokernel of the induced map X(T ∗) → X(S∗) is M . This implies that the cokernel of the map X(S) → X(T ) is M ∗. By theorem 5.5, up to discriminant negligible factors CL(M ) is the size of the kernel of the map HomG(X(T ),CL (L)) → HomG(X(S),CL (L)), which is exactlyHomG(M ∗,CL (L)). □ 6. General Transfer Principles for Class Groups We can apply corollary 5.2 to derive transfer principles for torsion in class groups of number ﬁelds in the following way: Take K to be an algebraic number ﬁeld and consider the multiplication by n map on T =ResK/ QGm. The cokernel of the induced map on class groups is precisely CL(K)[n], so if we let M be the ﬁnite module X(T )∗/nX (T )∗ thenCL(M ) = CL(K)[n]. As an example, consider a cubic ﬁeld K thats not normal. Let L be its Galois closure, and k the quadratic subﬁeld of L. This is called the quadratic resolvent ofK. Then a result of Gerth [6] says that the 3 torsion in CL(K) and CL(k) are the same up to a factor of Oǫ(Dǫ K ). We can recover this result as follows: Identify the Galois groupG = Gal(L/ Q) withS3. The 3-torsion in CL(K) corresponds to the G-module M generated by a1,a 2,a 3 over F3 with the natural permutation action by S3, while the 3-torsion in CL(k) corresponds to a G-module N , which is isomorphic to the submodule of M generated by a1 − a2 anda2 − a3. Moreover, M/N is a trivial G-module. By corollary 5.4 we have that CL(M/N ) is discriminant negligible and so the result follows by lemma 5.3. Similarly, suppose K is a quartic ﬁeld whose normal closure ˜K has S4 Galois group over Q. There are 3 subgroups of S4 of order 8, all conjugate and isomorphic to dihedral group with 8 elements D4. Pick one of these, and let F be its ﬁxed ﬁeld. F is called the cubic resolvent ﬁeld of K. We have the following result relating 2-torsion in quartic ﬁel ds to 2-torsion in the corresponding cubic resolvents. This result is new as fa r as the author knows: Lemma 6.1. Let K be a quartic ﬁeld, and F be its cubic resolvent. Then the 2-torsion in CL(K) and in CL(F ) are the same up to a factor of size Oǫ(Dǫ K ). Proof. Let L be the Galois closure of K and assume for simplicity that G = Gal(L/ Q) ≈ S4. Let M and N be the G-module corresponding to CL(K)[2] and CL(F )[2] respectively. As before, M corresponds to the F2 vector space generated by a1,a 2,a 3,a 4 with the natural permutation action of S4. We have a 1-dimensional trivial submodule M0 of M generated by a1 +a2 +a3 +a4. Set M1 to be M/M 0. Now, let M2 be the submodule of M1 generated by a1 +a2,a 1 +a3, so that M1/M 2 is a trivial G-module. A basis for N as a module over F2 is given by b1,b 2,b 3 where the S4 action is 16 JACOB TSIMERMAN given by identifying the bi with the right cosets S4/D 4. We have a trivial 1-dim submodule N0 given by b1 +b2 +b3, and N/N 0 ≈ M2 asS4-modules. Now, by applying corollaries 5.3 and 5.4 we get Cl(M ) = Cl(M1) = Cl(M2) = Cl(N/N 0) = Cl(N ) as desired. □ We end this section with some general remarks on torsion in cl ass groups. One expects that all torsion is discriminant negligible. Fo r positive integers n,d , Zhang[18] conjectures the bound (3) Cl(K)[n] ≪ ǫDǫ K asK varies over number ﬁelds of degreed. We can phrase Zhang’s conjecture in our language in the following way: Fix a group G and a ﬁnite G-module M . Now, suppose K is a Galois number ﬁeld with Gal( K/ Q) ≈ G. We can then consider M as a ﬁnite Gal( K/ Q) module. It then makes sense to talk about Cl(M ), leaving K out by abuse of notation. Conjecture 6.1. For all ﬁnite modules M , the function Cl(M ) is discriminant negligible. It is not hard to see that 6.1 is equivalent to Zhang’s conject ure. Zhang’s conjecture is the special case where the module M is the regular representation of G over Z/n Z for some positive integer n. However, since all modules are quotients of direct sums of such regular representation s, the equivalence follows from corollary 5.3. • In light of conjecture 6.1 the result of Gerth and lemma 6.1 mi ght not seem that interesting, since all torsion is supposed to b e Discriminant negligible! In fact, Gerth[6] proves a much more p recise relationship between the 3-torsion group of a cubic ﬁeld and its quadratic resolvent, in terms of ramiﬁcation. By following the proof of theorem 5.1 more closely one can prove that Cl(M ) is well deﬁned up to, roughly speaking, the contribution from the ramiﬁed p