B from∂X . Then∂W can be homotoped to a ∆1–minimal surface which, by abuse of notation, we call∂W ′, and the map of S intoN given by the covering projection is homotopic to a map whose image T ′ is ∆1–minimal. Also, ∂W ′ (resp. T ′) can be perturbed by an arbitrarily small perturbation to be an embedded (resp. smoothly immers ed) surface ∂W t (resp. Tt) boundingWt with the following properties: SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 25 (1) There exists an isotopy from ∂W to ∂W t which never crosses ∆1, and which induces an isotopy from W toWt, and a corresponding deformation of hyperbolic manifoldsX toXt which ﬁxes Σ pointwise. (2) There exists an isotopy from S toSt⊂ Xt which never crosses B, such that Tt is the projection of St toN . W T ′ ⊂ W S ⊂ X FIGURE 3. The surfaces T ′ andS inW andX respectively Proof. The proof is reasonably straightforward, given the work in §1 and §2.1. First, we obtain∂W ′ from∂W by shrinkwrapping rel. ∆1. Since ∆ = int(W )∩ ∆1 is a nonempty and proper subset of ∆1, ∂W satisﬁes the hypotheses of Theorem 1.10, and therefore ∂W ′ exists, and satisﬁes the desired properties. 26 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI For each t = ti in our approximating sequence, the metric gt on Wt lifts to a metric onXt which, by abuse of notation, we also call gt. Then with respect to thegt metric,∂X t acts as a barrier surface, and we can ﬁnd a gt locally least area surface St ⊂ int(Xt) which is gt globally least area in the isotopy class of S inXt\Nf (t)(B), by [MSY], just as in the proof of Lemma 1.20. Note thatS is necessarily homologically essential inXt\Nf (t)(B), since it separates each component of B from∂X t by hypothesis, and therefore any surface isotopic toS inXt\Nf (t)(B) must intersect a ﬁxed compact arc α fromB to∂X t. The immersed surfaces Tt⊂ N are obtained by mapping St toWt by the covering projection. After passing to a further subsequence of valuest =ti, the limit of the Tt surfaces exists as a map from S toN , with image T ′, by the argument of Lemma 1.24 applied locally . The regularity ofT ′ locally along ∆1 follows from the argument of Lemma 1.31, since that argument is completely lo cal. As in Lemma 1.34, we can repeat the construction above with th egs,t metrics and obtain a limit T ′ with the desired regularity . It follows that T ′ is ∆1–minimal. Notice that some local sheets of T ′ are actually minimal (in the hyperbolic metric) near geodesics in ∆1, corresponding to subsets ofSt inXt crossing components of Σ\B, by Lemma 2.1. In any case, T ′ is intrinsically CAT(− 1), and the theorem is proved. □ 2.3. Nonsimple geodesics. When we come to consider hyperbolic manifolds with parabolics, we need to treat the case that the geodesics ∆1 might not be simple. But there is a standard trick to reduce this case to the simple cas e, at the cost of slightly perturbing the hyperbolic metric. Explicitly , suppose Γ⊂ M is as in the statement of Theorem 1.10 except that some of the components are possibly not simple. Then for ever yǫ> 0 there exists a perturbation g of the hyperbolic metric on M in a neighborhood of Γ with the following properties: (1) The new metric g agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Nǫ(Γ) (2) With respect to the metric g, the curves in Γ are homotopic to a collection of simple geodesics Γ′ (3) The metric g is hyperbolic (i.e. has constant curvature − 1) onNǫ/ 2(Γ′) (4) The metric g is 1+ǫ–bilipschitz equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, and the sectional curvature of the g metric is pinched between− 1− ǫ and− 1 +ǫ. The existence of such a metric g follows from Lemma 5.5 of [Ca]. T o make an orthopedic comparison: think of the nonsimple geodesics Γ as a collection of unnaturally fused bones in Nǫ(Γ); the bones are broken, reset, and heal as simple geodesics in the new metric. It is clear that the methods of§1 apply equally well to the metricg, and therefore shrinkwrapping can be done with respect to the metric g, producing a surface which is intrinsically CAT(− 1 +ǫ). In fact, since such a metric exists for each ǫ, we can take a sequence of such metricsgǫ for each small ǫ >0, produce a shrinkwrapped surface Tǫ for each such ǫ, and take a limit T asǫ→ 0 which is intrinsically CAT (− 1), and which can be approximated by embedded surfaces, isotopic toS, in the complement of Γ\C where C is a ﬁnite subset of geodesics whose cardinality can be a priori bounded above in terms of the genus of S. W e will not be using this stronger fact in the sequel, since the existence of a CAT (− 1 +ǫ) surface is quite enough for our purposes. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 27 3. A SYMPTOTIC TUBE RADIUS AND LENGTH By [Bo] an end of a complete hyperbolic 3–manifoldN is geometrically inﬁnite if and only if there exists an exiting sequence of closed geod esics. In this chapter we show that if π1(N ) is parabolic free, then the geodesics can be chosen to be η–separated for some η; in particular, all are simple. Deﬁnition 3.1. Let N be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with geometrically inﬁnite end E. Deﬁne the E-asymptotic tube radius to be the supremum over all sequences{γi} of closed geodesics exitingE, of lim sup i→∞ tube radius(γi) Similarly deﬁne the E-asymptotic length to be inﬁmum over all sequences {γi} as before of lim inf i→∞ length(γi) W e will drop the preﬁxE when the end in question is understood. Proposition 3.2. IfE is a geometrically inﬁnite end of the complete hyperbolic 3- manifold N without parabolics, then asymptotic tube radius> 1/ 4 asymptotic length. If asymptotic length = 0, then asymptotic tube radius = ∞ . There exists a uniform lower bound η = 0. 025 to the asymptotic tube radius of a geometrically inﬁnite end of a complete parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold. Proof. Meyerhoff [Me] deﬁnes a monotonically decreasing function r : (0, 0. 1]→ [0. 3,∞ ) such that if γ is a closed geodesic in N and length(γ) ≤ t, then tube radius(γ)≥ r(t). Furthermore lim t→ 0r(t) = ∞ . Therefore, the second statement of Proposition 3.2 follows from [Me] and the third follows fr om the ﬁrst statement and [Me]. (Actually , Proposition 3.3 will show that log(3)/ 2 is a lower bound.) Now suppose that asymptotic length = L∈ [0. 1,∞ ). Then there exists a sequence{γi} exitingE such that length (γi) → L. As in §5 [G2], if tube radius (γt)≤ 1 4 length(γi), then there exists a geodesic βi homotopic to a curve which is a union of a segment of γi and an orthogonal arc from γi to itself, and each of these segments has length ≤ length(γi)/ 2. By straightening these segments and using the law of cosines,