isometry of H3 so that the edge e′ ∞ ofIθ has its ideal endpoints at 0 and ∞ , and so that the terminal ﬁxed point of ˜α ∗ (with respect to the reference orientation for α ) lies at 1 ∈ C. Then for any r >0 there exists a θ so that the two ideal vertices of Iθ that do not lie at 0 and ∞ lie within a small disk |1 − z|< r. It follows that the dihedral angle of Iθ at e′ ∞ tends to 0 as θ → ∞ . But the volume of an ideal tetrahedron tends to 0 as any of its dihedral angles tends to 0, so we have massf ǫ θ (∆)< vol(Iθ ) → 0 as θ → ∞ . Continuation of the proof of Lemma 5.9: By Lemma 5.10, for any Dehn twist block B, the quantity mass f ǫ θ (B) is as small as we like for θ suﬃciently large. If Btw denotes the union of all Dehn twist blocks in N∆, then, we may choose θ suﬃciently large so that massf ǫ θ (Btw)< 1. Since fǫ θ is simplicial on N∆, we have massf ǫ θ (∆)< V3 36 JEFFREY F. BROCK for any tetrahedron ∆ ⊂ N∆, and since all but at most K∆dP(PX,P Y ) tetrahedra inN∆ lie in Btw, we have massf ǫ θ (N∆)<K ∆ · V3 ·dP(PX,P Y ) + 1. Bounding the volume of the caps. The bound on the fǫ θ -mass of the triangulated part N∆ in terms of the distance dP(PX,P Y ) will be suﬃcient for Proposition 5.8 once we show the following uniform bound on the fǫ θ -mass of the caps of N . Lemma 5.11. There is a uniform constant Kcap, depending only on S so that after modifyingfǫ θ by a homotopy on capX we have massf ǫ θ (capX )<K cap and similarly for capY . Proof: Our goal will be to modify the homotopy fǫ θ |capX from ∂ − Nǫ(C(X,Y )) to the simplicial hyperbolic surface ZX by cutting the surface S into annuli and controlling the trace of the homotopy on each annulus (a solid torus ). To obtain such control, we choose this decomposition compatibly with the pants dec ompositionPX . We ﬁx attention on a single pair of pants ˆS ⊂ S − PX . By a ﬁgure-8 curve on ˆS we will mean a closed curve that intersects itself once on ˆS and divides ˆS into three annuli, one parallel to each boundary component of ˆS (see Figure 13). To prove Lemma 5.11 we establish the following basic lemma in hyperbolic surface g eometry. (We continue to treat the closed case; the case when S has boundary is similar). Lemma 5.12. Let S a closed surface with negative Euler characteristic, and le t L′ ≥ L be a constant greater than or equal to the Bers constant L forS. Then there is a constant L8(L′)> 0 so that the following holds: if P is a pants decomposition of S, Z ∈ Singk(S) is a possibly singular hyperbolic surface, and the length bo und ℓZ(α ) < L′ holds for each α ∈ P , then any ﬁgure- 8 curve γ in any component ˆS ⊂ S − P satisﬁes ℓZ(γ)<L 8(L′). Figure 13. A ﬁgure eight curve. THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 37 Proof: Note that any bound on the geodesic length of a given ﬁgure-8 curv e γ guarantees a bound on the geodesic length of any other, by taking twice the original bound. Assume ﬁrst that Z ∈ Teich(S), so Z is a non-singular hyperbolic surface. From the thick-thin decomposition for hyperbolic surfaces, given any δ > 0, there is a uniform bound Dδ to the diameter diam( Z≥ δ) of the δ-thick part of Z, where Dδ depends only on δ and the surface S. Let ∂ ˆS = α 1 ⊔ α 2 ⊔ α 3. Since ℓZ(αi) < L′, there is a δ so that α ∗ i can only intersect Z<δ in a component of Z<δ for which it is the core curve. Choosing δ smaller if necessary, we can ensure that the boundary of any component of Z<δ is a curve of length less than L′. Let ˆZ be the realization of ˆS as a subsurface of Z bounded by the curves ∪α ∗ i . Either two of the α ∗ i lie entirely in Z≥ δ or two of the αi are homotopic into Z<δ. Without loss of generality, assume α ∗ 1 and α ∗ 2 lie in Z≥ δ. Then they can be joined by an arc b in ˆZ of length less than Dδ. Either α 1 ·b ·α 2 ·b− 1 or α 1 ·b ·α − 1 2 ·b− 1 is a ﬁgure-8 curve of length less than 2 L′ + 2Dδ. Otherwise, if A1 and A2 are components of Z<δ representing the homotopy classes of α 1 andα 2, then there are componentsa1 of∂A 1 anda2 of∂A 2 with length less than L′, and an arc b joining a1 to a2 in ˆZ of length less than Dδ. By the same reasoning, there is a ﬁgure-8 curveγ of length ℓZ(γ)< 2L′ + 2Dδ. To treat the potentially singular case, let Z ∈ Singk(S) satisfy ℓZ(αi) < L′ for each αi ∈ P . Let Z h ∈ Teich(S) represent the hyperbolic surface in the same conformal class as Z. If each αi ∈ P satisﬁes ℓZh (αi)<L ′ then there is a ﬁgure-8 curve γ ⊂ ˆS withℓZh (γ)< 2L′+2Dδ by the above reasoning. By Ahlfors’ lemma, [Ah] we have ℓZ(γ)<ℓZh(γ)< 2L′ + 2Dδ proving the lemma in this case. If, however, some αi ⊂ ∂ ˆS satisﬁesℓZh (αi) ≥ L′ ≥ L, then by Theorem 2.1 there is a simple closed curve β , with i(αi,β ) ̸= 0, for which ℓZh(β )<L . Again applying Ahlfors’ lemma, the curve β has length ℓZ(β )<L on Z, so its geodesic representative β ∗ furnishes an arc b in ˆS that joins α ∗ i to α ∗ j , or joins α ∗ i to itself. In either case, two copies of b together with arcs in the geodesics at its endpoints can be assembled to form a ﬁgure-8 curv e β ⊂ ˆS with length bounded by ℓZ(β )< 2L′ + 2L ≤ 4L′. By setting L8(L′) = 4L′ + 2Dδ the lemma follows. 38 JEFFREY F. BROCK Remark: Though we continue to work in the setting where S is closed, the proof of the Lemma for the case when ∂S ̸= ∅ goes through simply. Continuation of the proof of Lemma 5.11: Again consider the subsurface ˆS and its realization as a subsurface ˆZX ⊂ ZX bounded by geodesics ˆα 1, ˆα 2 and ˆα 3 on ZX. Let Xǫ h =∂ +Nǫ(C(X,Y )) denote the boundary component of Nǫ(C(X,Y )) facing X, and let ˆXǫ h denote the realization of ˆS as a subsurface Xǫ h bounded by geodesics ¯α 1, ¯α 2 and ¯α 3 in the path metric on