rimes in K. Thus, the statement of lemma 6.1 could likely be reﬁned to say that the 2-ranks of a quartic ﬁeld and its cubic resolvent are the same up to ramiﬁed primes. As our main interest is in Galois or bits of CM points, we do not pursue this. • In fact, Brumer and Silverman[1] asked whether the right han d side of (3) can be replaced with D C ln ln DK K . The value D C ln ln DK K can be best understood in terms of the ramiﬁed primes in K. These are precisely the primes dividing DK . Now, for SK denoting the number of distinct primes dividing DK , one can verify nSK ≪ D C ln ln DK K , BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 17 with equality for DK equaling the product of the ﬁrst X primes (X ≈ lnDK ln lnDK ). Thus, for 2-torsion of certain quadratic ﬁelds the bound is tight. • The above methods cannot recover some transfer principles, such as the Scholtz reﬂection principle which relates 3-torsion in the quadratic ﬁelds Q( √ D) and Q( √ − 3D), or the work of Ellenberg and Venkatesh[5]. This is because these principles use heavily class ﬁeld theory, which has not been an input in our work thus far. Nonet heless, one can rephrase and generalize these reﬂection princ iples in this language. 7. Applications to Lower bounds for Galois orbits In this section we apply results of section 5 to the study Galo is orbits of special points in higher rank. Let Ag, 1(C) denote the moduli space for principally polarized complex abelian varieties of dimens ion g. We also let Hg denote the Siegel-Upper half space, so that Ag, 1(C) ≈ GSp2g(Q)\Hg × GSp2g(Af )/GSp 2g(ˆZ). From now on, given a ﬁeld F we refer to the torus ResF/ QGm simply as F ×. Let x be a CM point in Ag, 1 corresponding to a principally polarized Abelian varietyAx. We set Rx to be the center of the ring of endomorphisms End(Ax) of Ax. All of the CM points in Ag, 1(C) are known to be deﬁned over ¯Q, and so admit a natural action of the Galois group Gal( Q/ Q). We recall conjecture 1.1 for the convenience of the reader: Conjecture 7.1. There exists a positive constant δg such that the inequality |Gal( Q/ Q) ·x| ≫ g Disc(Rx)δg holds for all ǫ >0 as x varies over all CM points in Ag, 1. We begin by reviewing the description of the Galois action on A in terms of the CM theory. 7.1. Background on CM theory . Let A be a principally polarized complex CM abelian variety, which we shall take to be simple for t he moment. Then there is a CM ﬁeld K such that End(A) ⊗ Z Q ∼ =K. We let F denote the maximal totally real subﬁeld of K. Moreover, there is a set S = {φ 1,φ 2,...,φ g} of complex embeddings of K such that the representation of K on the complex tangent space of A is given as the direct sum of the 1-dimensional representations induced by S. Moreover, S ∪ ¯S give all embeddings of K into C. Let L denote the normal closure of K and S0 be all the embeddings of L into C which induce an element of S on K. The pair (K,S ) is referred to as the CM type of A. Since A is simple, (K,S ) must be a primitive CM-type, which means that the right stabilizer of S0 in Gal(L/ Q) is Gal(K/ Q). 18 JACOB TSIMERMAN Now, let MT 0 x denote the torus which is the pre-image of the torus Q× under the norm map on K, so that MT 0 x :=ker(K × → F ×/ Q×,a → a¯a). Then corresponding to A there is an embedding of algebraic groups: φx :MT 0 x֒→GSp2g, and moreover we have the equality φx(MT 0 x (Q)) ∩ GSp2g(ˆZ) ≈ End(A)0, where End(A)0 := {a ∈ End(A) |a¯a ∈ Z}. Now, there is a reciprocity morphism rx :L× → MT 0 x given by rx(a) = ∏ τ∈S0 τ− 1(a). Since the morphism rx depends only on the CM type ( K,S ) we denote it also byrK,S . In the future, if there is no confusion we drop the S and simply write rK . We can consider the map sx : (AL f )× → GSp2g(Q)\Hg × GSp2g(Af )/GSp 2g(ˆZ) given by sx(a) → (x,φ x ◦rx(a)). The image of sx is equal to the Galois orbit of the CM point representing A. Moreover, there is a unique arithmetic subtorus MTx֒→MT 0 x such that rx is surjective onto MTx as a morphism of tori, and we call this the Mumford-Tate group of A. We now review the general theory where A is not necessarily simple. In this case A is isogenous to a product Ani i where each Ai is a simple Abelian variety with CM such the Ai are mutually non-isogenous. Let ( Ki,Si) be theCM type of Ai (Note that it does NOT follow that the Ki are mutually non-isomorphic!). Let L denote the compositum of the normal closures Li of the Ki, and S0 i be the set of embeddings of L into C which induce one of the Si on Ki. Let Fi denote the maximal totally real subﬁeld of Ki and set MT 0 x to be the preimage of Q× under the norm map on ∏ iKi so that MT 0 x :=ker( ∏ i K × i → ( ∏ i F × i )/ Q×,a → a¯a). As before, there is an embedding φx :MT 0 x֒→GSp2g and moreover we have the identity φx(MT 0 x (Q)) ∩ GSp2g(ˆZ) ≈ Z(End(A))0, where Z(End(A)) is the center of End(A) and Z(End(A))0 := {a ∈ Z(End(A)) |a¯a ∈ Z}. BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 19 The reciprocity morphism rx :L× → MT 0 x is now deﬁned to be rx(a) = ( ∏ τ∈Si 0 τ− 1(a))i, where we consider MT 0 x as a subtorus of ∏ iK × i . Again, there is a unique arithmetic subtorus MTx֒→MT 0 x such that rx is surjective onto MTx as a morphism of tori, and we call this the Mumford-Tate group ofA. As before, the image of the composition sx : (AL f )× → GSp2g(Q)\Hg × GSp2g(Af )/GSp 2g(ˆZ) is the Galois orbit of the CM point representing A. 7.2. Reducing to ﬁelds. Consider for a moment conjecture 7.1 in the case where A is a simple CM abelian variety with CM by a ﬁeld K such that the endomorphism ring of A is the full ring of integers in OK . Then the map φx ◦rx factors through ˜rK :ClL → ClK. A positive answer to conjecture 7.1 would thus require a posi tive answer to the following conjecture, which is purely a conjecture abou t ﬁelds: Conjecture 7.2. LetK be a CM ﬁeld of degree 2g, and let S be a primitive CM