TA tw(TA) V Figure 11. Triangulating the Dehn twist block. The dotted edges indicate diagonal switches for TA and tw(TA) that produce a common triangulation of the annulus, which results in the pictured triangulation of a solid torus V . Btw− α is obtained analogously, by re-gluing with a left Dehn twist instead of a right Dehn twist. The left Dehn twist block Btw− α carries the triangulation T tw− α and realizes the move TW − 1 α . Blocks realizing the other moves are triangulated as follows. BLII. Blow-up and blow-down blocks. We modify the standard block triangulation to obtain triangulated blocks that realize blow-up and blow-down mov es as follows. To realize a genus 1 α -blow-down by a block triangulation, we modify the standard block triangulation Tα on Bα by collapsing the compression annulus on ∂ +Bα as in the description of the move BD 1 α. The only diﬀerence is that here in addition to collapsing triangles to edges we also collapse tetrahedra to triangles . 30 JEFFREY F. BROCK Similarly, if β = β (α,T ), we obtain a block triangulation realizing the genus 1 β -blow-upBU 1 β by collapsing the β compression annulus on ∂ −Bβ . The genus 0 α -blow-down (and blow-up) moves come from diagonal switches on hexagons. We realize the move BD 0 α by gluing tetrahedra realizing each of the diagonal switches to ∂ +Bα . Likewise, the block triangulation realizing the genus 0 β -blow-up can be obtained by gluing tetrahedra in this way to the β -hexagons on ∂ −Bα . We denote the α -blow-up block by Bbu α and the α -blow-down block by Bbd α . BLIII. Straightening blocks. There are two other types of block triangulations we will need that realize the identity move on a blown-down triangulation. We call these triangulated blocks straightening blocks. Given the triangulation BD 1 α (T ) or BD 0 α (T ) for a standard triangulation T suited to a pants decomposition P containing α , the genus g straightening triangulation, g = 0, 1 is obtained by completing the cell decomposition (BDg α (T ) ∩ Sα ) × [0, 1]/ ∼ of Bα , and extending this decomposition to a triangulation of Bα with no new vertices. It is easy to check that this can be done. We denote the s traightening blocks by Bst α,β where β =β (α,T ). 5.3. Mapping in blocks and building the model. We now use our block triangulations to build a model manifold N ∼ = S × I. We build N in stages corresponding to standard triangulations Tj suited to pants decompositions Pj that intervene between PX and PY respectively. At each stage there is a model Nj also homeomorphic to S × I so that the top boundary component ∂ +Nj = S × { 1} is triangulated by the jth triangulation Tj in the sequence of triangulations. Each Nj will be obtained from Nj− 1 by attaching a triangulated block to ∂ +Nj− 1 that realizes the elementary move needed to move from Tj− 1 to Tj. The model N will come equipped with a map f : N → C(X,Y ) that is simplicial on each block: Deﬁnition 5.6. An incompressible mapping f : N → M from a triangulated 3manifold to a hyperbolic 3-manifold is simplicial if the lift ˜f : ˜N → H3 sends each k-simplex to the convex hull of its vertices. The following theorem describes the properties of our model and its mapping to the quasi-Fuchsian manifoldQ(X,Y ). For simplicity we assume for the remainder of this section that S is closed, and detail the necessary modiﬁcations to the argument at the end. Theorem 5.7. Given Q(X,Y ), there is a model manifold N ∼ = S × I, equipped with a surjective homotopy equivalence f : N → N ǫ(C(X,Y )) to the ǫ-neighborhood of the convex core C(X,Y ) with the following properties: (1) N is the union N = capX ∪ N∆ ∪ capY of the caps capX ∼ =S × I and capY ∼ =S × I and the triangulated part N∆, a union of blocks of the above type glued top boundary to botto m boundary, all but 3dP(PX,P Y ) of which are Dehn twist blocks. (2) The map f is piecewise C1 and is simplicial on N∆. THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 31 (3) For each tetrahedron ∆ inN∆ that lies in a Dehn twist block, f maps some edge of ∆ to a spinning geodesic. (4) The restriction f |capX is a homotopy from ∂ − Nǫ(C(X,Y )) to a simplicial hyperbolic surface realizing PX , and the restriction f |capY is a homotopy from a simplicial hyperbolic surface realizing PY to ∂ +Nǫ(C(X,Y )). Proof: To motivate the construction of N we build the map f in stages as well. Mapping in capX . Let TX and TY be standard triangulations suited to PX and PY . Let fX : S × [0, 1] → C(X,Y ) determine a homotopy of the convex core boundary gX : Xh → ∂ −C(X,Y ) to a simplicial hyperbolic surface hX :ZX → C(X,Y ) with associated triangulation TX so that if v and ¯v are the vertices of TX on α ∈ PX , fX (v) = pα and fX (¯v) = ¯pα . Notice that this implies that hX realizes each curve α ∈ PX . Let N0 =S × [0, 1], denote the domain for fX; we will refer to N0 = capX as the X-cap of N . The top boundary component ∂ +N0 carries the triangulation TX . Working inductively, we assume given a model Nj at the jth stage: i.e. (1) the model Nj ∼ = S × I, consists of the X-cap and a triangulated part so that the upper boundary ∂ +Nj is triangulated by a standard triangulation Tj suited to Pj, (2) Nj comes equipped with a map fj : Nj → C(X,Y ) that is simplicial on the triangulated part of Nj, (3) fj|∂ +Nj factors through a simplicial hyperbolic surface hj : Zj → C(X,Y ) with associated triangulation Tj so that hj sends vertices vγ and ¯vγ on γ ∈ Pj to pγ and ¯pγ on γ ∗. Let α ∈ Pj and α ′ ∈ Pj+1 be the curves involved in the genus g elementary move (Pj,P j+1), and let n be the integer guaranteed by Lemma 5.4 for which BUg α ′ ◦BDg α ◦TW n α (Tj) = Tj+1 is a standard triangulation suited to Pj+1. We now specify how to add triangulated blocks to Nj and extend fj simplicially over each additional block to obtain the next stage of the model Nj+1. Mapping in Dehn twist blocks. Ifn is positive, we attach n right Dehn twist blocks to the model and extend fj over them in sequence, while if n is negative we do likewise with left Dehn twist blocks. We assume n is positive; the negative case is identical with left Dehn twist blocks replacing right Dehn twist blocks. We attach