the paper we will use the contraction vol( X,Y ) = vol(core(Q(X,Y ))) and the notation ≍ to denote the comparability of two quantities; then Theorem 1.2 becomes dWP(X,Y ) ≍ vol(X,Y ). The volume of the convex core of a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold M = H3/ Γ is directly related to the lowest eigenvalue of the Laplacian on M as well as the Hausdorﬀ dimension of the limit set Λ(Γ) ⊂ ˆC, namely the complement of the invariant domain of discontinuity Ω(Γ) ⊂ ˆC where the action of Kleinian covering group Γ ⊂ PSL2(C) for M is properly discontinuous (see Figure 2 for two examples of limit sets 1). As an immediate application, Theorem 1.2 implies the following new relation ship between these analytic invariants and the Weil-Petersson distance . Let λ 0(X,Y ) denote the lowest eigenvalue of the Laplacian on the quasi-Fuchsian hyperbolic 3manifold Q(X,Y ) = H3/ Γ(X,Y ) and let D(X,Y ) denote the Hausdorﬀ dimension of the limit set of Γ( X,Y ). 1W e have employed computer programs of Curt McMullen in our ge neration of Figures 1 and 2. THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 3 Figure 2. Limit sets for two quasi-Fuchsian groups. Theorem 1.3. Given S there are constants K > 0, C1, C2, C3, and C4 > 1 so that if dWP(X,Y )>K then C1 dWP(X,Y )2 ≤ λ 0(X,Y ) ≤ C2 dWP(X,Y ), and 2 − C3 dWP(X,Y ) ≤ D(X,Y ) ≤ 2 − C4 dWP(X,Y )2. Proof: The relation λ 0(X,Y ) = D(X,Y )(2 − D(X,Y )) follows from a general result by D. Sullivan (see [Sul2, Thm. 2.17]), after applying Bowen’s The orem [Bow] that D(X,Y ) ≥ 1 with equality if and only if X =Y . Theorem 1.2 may be rephrased to claim the existence of K, K ′ so that for dWP(X,Y )>K we have dWP(X,Y ) K ′ ≤ vol(X,Y ) ≤ K ′dWP(X,Y ). The theorem then follows from the double inequality c1 vol(X,Y )2 ≤ λ 0(X,Y ) ≤ c2 vol(X,Y ) (see [BC, Main Thm.] and [Can1, Thm. A]) after collecting constants. The pants graph. Since Theorem 1.2 relies directly on Theorem 1.1 we detail our coarse perspective on the Weil-Petersson metric. To describe the nature of the quasi-isometry between the graph P(S) and the Weil-Petersson metric, we recall that by a theorem of Bers, there is a constantL> 0 depending only on S so that for each X ∈ Teich(S) there is a pants decomposition P so that ℓX(α )<L for each α ∈ P, 4 JEFFREY F. BROCK α α β β Figure 3. Elementary moves on pants decompositions. whereℓX (α ) denotes the length of the geodesic representative of α in the hyperbolic metric on X. If P is a pants decomposition, we denote by Vℓ(P ) the sub level set Vℓ(P ) = { X | max α ∈P (ℓX(α ))<ℓ } . Then Bers’s theorem guarantees that the sub level sets V (P ) = VL(P ) cover Teichm¨ uller space. Coarsely, the Weil-Petersson distance records the conﬁguration of the sub level setsV (P ) with P(S) as its model. Indeed, if PX andPY are pants decompositions for which X ∈ V (PX ) and Y ∈ V (PY ), then the quasi-isometry of Theorem 1.1 arises from the comparability dP(PX,P Y ) ≍ dWP(X,Y ) where dP(PX,P Y ) is the minimal number of elementary moves required to travel from PX to PY in P(S). We brieﬂy outline our proof of Theorem 1.1 and its application to Theor em 1.2. Outline of the proof of Theorem 1.1. Let P0(S) denote the vertex set of P(S), and let Q : P0(S) → Teich(S) be any map so that Q(P ) ∈ V (P ). Applying work of S. Wolpert and H. Masur there is a uniform constant D > 0 so that the Weil-Petersson diameter of V (P ) satisﬁes diamWP(V (P ))<D for all P ∈ P0(S). A simple argument shows that for any two pants decompositions P1 andP2 diﬀering by an elementary move there is a single Riemann surface X on which all curves in Pi have length less than L. Thus V (P1) ∩ V (P2) is non-empty, and Q is 2D-Lipschitz. Given two pants decompositions P1 and P2 for which V2L(P1) ∩ V2L(P2) ̸= ∅, there is an X ∈ V2L(P1) ∩ V2L(P2): i.e. a single Riemann surface on which each curve in P1 ∪P2 has length at most 2 L. It follows that there is a uniform C so that the total intersection number satisﬁes i(P1,P 2) ≤ C, which in turn provides a uniform bound to the distance dP(P1,P 2) in P(S). THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 5 A compactness argument shows that each X ∈ V (P ) = VL(P ) lies a uniformly deﬁnite distance from ∂V 2L(P ). Thus, a unit-length Weil-Petersson geodesic can always be covered by a uniform number of sub level sets V2L(P ). It follows that any pair of pants decompositions P and P ′ for which V (P ) and V (P ′) contain the endpoints of a unit length Weil-Petersson geodesic, P and P ′ have uniformly bounded distance in P(S), and the theorem follows. Outline of the proof of Theorem 1.2. The proof has two parts. Bounding volume from below: The bound below of core volume in terms of the Weil-Petersson distance begins with an interpolation through the co nvex core ht : Zt → core(Q(X,Y )) of 1-Lipschitz maps of hyperbolic surfaces. It follows that for eac h essential simple closed curve α we have inf t ℓZt (α ) ≥ ℓQ(X,Y )(α ). The path Zt, then, only passes through sets V (P ) for which each element in P has length less than L in Q(X,Y ). Applying recent work of Masur and Minsky, we show if a sequence {P1,...,P n} of pants decompositions is built from N curves and makes bounded jumps, i.e. dP(Pj,P j+1)<k, then its ends satisfy the bound dP(P1,P n) < K0N , where K0 depends only on k and S. The Margulis lemma forces closed geodesics with length less than L inQ(X,Y ) that represent diﬀerent isotopy classes to be uniformly equidistrib uted through the convex core. Since each such representative makes a deﬁnite con tribution to core volume, the lower bound follows. Bounding volume from above. Given pants decompositions PX and PY so that X ∈ V (PX ) and Y ∈ V (PY ), and a geodesic G ⊂ P(S) joining PX to PY , we consider the closed geodesics spin(G) = {α ∗ |α ∈ P for P ∈ G} whereα ∗ denotes the geodesic representative of α inQ(X,Y ). We build a straight triangulation T of all but a uniformly bounded volume portion of core( Q(X,Y )) so that vertices of T lie on α ∗ ∈ spin(G), the so-called spinning geodesics. Our triangulation has the property that all but constant times dP(PX,P Y ) of the tetrahedra in T have at least one edge in a spinning geodesic α ∗ . We then use a spinning trick: