bounded open subset of R2, andA an oriented line contained in Ω. Letψ :A→ R andg :∂Ω→ R be given, withg≥ ψ on∂Ω∩A. Deﬁne K ={v∈ g +H 1,p 0 |v≥ ψ onA} Minimize J(u) = ∫ F (x,u, ∇ u)dx overu∈ K. HereH 1,p denotes the usual Sobolev space over Ω for the Lp norm, with zero boundary conditions. The main conditions typically imposed on F are sufﬁcient regularity of F and its partial derivatives (Lipschitz is usually enough) and ellipticity, meaning that the matrix (Fik)i,k =1, 2 of the second partial derivatives of F (x,u,η ) with respect toη∈ R2 is uniformly positive deﬁnite on compact subsets of Ω× R2+1 (see [Fre] page 281 for details). Roughly speaking, F is elliptic if the critical functions of the functional J satisfy a “mean value property” — the value at each point is a weighted average of the value at nearby points. For example, if we want the graph of u to be a (Euclidean) minimal surface away from ψ (A), then the formula for F isF = (1 +|∇u|2)1/ 2 which is certainly real analytic and elliptic. The deﬁnition of F for a nonparametric minimal surface in exponential co–ordinates on hyperbolic space is more complicated, but certainly F is real analytic and elliptic in the sense of Frehse. See Figure 2 for an example of the graph of a function solving t he Dirichlet thin obstacle problem, whereψ|A is constant. This surface is visually indistinguishable from the graph of the function solving the unparameterized m inimal surface thin obstacle problem with the same boundary and obstacle data, b ut for computer implementation, the Dirichlet problem is less computation ally costly . The next theorem establishes not only the desired continuit y of∂u, but actually gives an estimate for the modulus of continuity . The followi ng is a restatement of Theorem 1.3 on page 26 of [Ri] in our context: Theorem 1.28 (Richardson [Ri] Regularity of thin obstacle). Letu be a solution to the thin obstacle problem for F elliptic in the sense of Frehse and p∈ [1,∞ ], and suppose that ∂Ω,ψ,g are smooth. Then ∂u is continuous along A in the tangent direction, one–sided continuous in the normal direction on either side, and conti nuous in the normal direction at a non–interior point. Furthermore, ∂u is H¨ older continuous, with exponent 1/ 2; i.e. the modulus of continuity of ∂u isO(t1/ 2). Remark 1.29. Note that C1+1/ 2 is actually best possible. Consider the function u : z→ Im(z3/ 2) for u∈ C slit along the positive real axis, where we take the branch which is negative sufﬁciently close to the slit. This solves a thin obstacle problem for the Dirichlet integral, and is only C1+1/ 2 atz = 0. Remark 1.30. For our applications, the fact thatu isC1+1/ 2 is more than necessary . In fact, all we use is that u isC1. This is proved (with a logarithmic modulus of continuity for du) by [Fre], and (with a H ¨ older modulus of continuity for du) in arbitrary dimension by [K]. W e apply this theorem to our context: 20 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI FIGURE 2. The graph of a function solving the thin obstacle problem Lemma 1.31 (Regularity along coincidence set) . Foru :T→ M deﬁned as above, the derivativedu along local sheets ofT is continuous from each side along the coincidence set L, and continuous at non–interior points. Proof. Ifp is an interior point of L, this follows by the reﬂection principle. Otherwise, by Lemma 1.27 and the discussion above, the tangent con e is a planeπ in the tangent space at p. W e show how to choose local co–ordinates in a ballB near each pointp∈ L such thatB∩ Γ is thex–axis, each local sheet of T is the graph of a function u : Ω→ R, and u is non–negative along the x–axis. Let γ = B∩ Γ, and let γ ′ be another geodesic throughp orthogonal to γ and tangent to π . LetF andG be foliations of B by totally geodesic planes orthogonal to γ andγ ′ respectively . Then each leaf of F is totally geodesic for both the hyperbolic and the gt metric for all t, and each leaf ofG is totally geodesic for the gt metric for sufﬁciently large t. It follows that T has no source or sink singularities with respect to either fo liation. Since T∩ B is a (topological) disk, by reasons of Euler characteristic it can have no saddle singularities either, and therefore no singularities at al l. W e letF andG be level sets of two co–ordinate functions on B. Deﬁne a third co–ordinate function to be (signed) hyperbolic distance to the plane containing γ andγ ′, and observe that u is a graph in these co–ordinates. It follows that u solves an instance of the thin obstacle problem, and by Theorem 1.28 or by [Fre] or [K] the desired regularity of du follows. □ SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 21 Remark 1.32. The structure of the coincidence set is important to underst and, and it has been studied by various authors. Hans Lewy [Lew] showe d that for J the Dirichlet integral andψ analytic, the coincidence set is a ﬁnite union of points and intervals. Athanasopoulos [Ath] proved the same result for the minimal surface question, for symmetric domain Ω and obstacleA, but his (very short and elegant) proof relies fundamentally on the symmetry of the problem, a nd we do not see how it applies in our context. Note that if the Hausdorff dimension of the coincidence set i s strictly< 1, then sinceT isC1+1/ 2 (and therefore Lipschitz) along this coincidence set, the t heory of removable singularities implies that T is actually real analytic along Γ. It follows in this case that the coincidence set consists of a ﬁnite unio n of isolated points, and thatT is actually a minimal surface. See e.g. [Car] for details. Remark 1.33. Existence results for the thin obstacle problem for minimal surfaces with analytic obstacles (see e.g. [Ri], [K], [N]) gives an al ternative proof of the existence of the limit T . Given S, we can shrinkwrap S near Γ in small balls by using existence for the thin obstacle problem, and away from Γ by replacing small disks with least area embedded disks with the same boundary . The argument of [HS] implies that for S 2–incompressible, this converges to a surface T . 1.8. CAT(− 1) property . W e have shown that T satisﬁes all the properties of the conclusion of Theorem 1.10, except that we have not yet shown that it is intrinsically CAT(− 1). In this subsection we show that after possibly replacing T by a new surface with the same properties, we can insist thatT is CAT(− 1) with respect to the path metric induced from M . Lemma 1.34 (CAT(-1) property). After possibly replacingT by a new immersed surface with the same properties, T is CAT(− 1) with respect to the path metric induced from M . Proof. T o show thatT is CAT(− 1) we will show that