remove the tubular neighborhoods of Γ bounded by these totally geodesic surfaces, and denote the result M\Nf (t)(Γ) byM ′ throughout the remainder of this proof. W e assume, after a small isotopy if necessary , that S does not intersect Nf (t) for any t, and therefore we can (and do) think of S as a surface in M ′. Notice that M ′ is a complete Riemannian manifold with totally geodesic bounda ry . W e will construct the surfaceSt inM ′, in the same isotopy class as S (also inM ′). If there exists a lower bound on the injectivity radius in M ′ with respect to the gt metric, then the main theorem of [MSY] implies that either su ch a globally least area surface St can be found, or S is the boundary of a twisted I–bundle over a closed surface in M ′, or else S can be homotoped off every compact set in M ′. First we show that these last two possibilities cannot occur. IfS is nonseparating inM , then it intersects some essential loop β with algebraic intersection number 1. It follows that S cannot be homotoped off β , and does not bound an I–bundle. Similarly , ifγ1,γ 2 are distinct geodesics of Γ separated from each other by S, then theγi’s can be joined by an arc α which has algebraic intersection number 1 with the surface S. The same is true of any S′ homotopic to S; it follows that S cannot be homotoped off the arc α , nor does it bound an I–bundle disjoint from Γ, and therefore does not bound an I–bundle inM ′. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 11 Now suppose that the injectivity radius on M ′ is not bounded below . W e use the following trick. Let g′ t be obtained from the metric gt by perturbing it on the complement of some enormous compact regionE so that it has a ﬂaring end there, and such that there is a barrierg′ t-minimal surface close to∂E , separating the complement ofE inM ′ fromS. Then by [MSY] there is a globally g′ t least area surface S′ t, contained in the compact subset of M ′ bounded by this barrier surface. Since S′ t must either intersect β orα , by the Bounded Diameter Lemma 1.15, unless the hyperbolic area of S′ t∩ E is very large, the diameter of S′ t in E is much smaller than the distance from α orβ to∂E . Since by hypothesis, S′ t is least area for the g′ t metric, its restriction to E has hyperbolic area less than the hyperbolic area of S, and therefore there is an a priori upper bound on its diameter in E. By choosing E big enough, we see that S′ t is contained in the interior of E, wheregt andg′ t agree. ThusS′ t is globally least area for the gt metric in M ′, and therefore St = S′ t exists for anyt. □ The bounded diameter lemma easily implies the following: Lemma 1.21 (Compact set). There is a ﬁxed compact set E⊂ M such that the surfaces St constructed in Lemma 1.20 are all contained in E. Proof. Since the hyperbolic areas of the St are all uniformly bounded (by e.g. the hyperbolic area of S) and are 2–incompressible rel. Γ, they have uniformly bounded diameter away from Γ outside of Margulis tubes. Since for homological reasons they must intersect the compact sets α or β , they can intersect at most ﬁnitely many Margulis tubes. It follows that they are all con tained in a ﬁxed bounded neighborhoodE ofα orβ , containing Γ. □ T o extract good limits of sequences of minimal surfaces, one generally needs a priori bounds on the area and the total curvature of the limiting sur faces. Here for a surface S, the total curvature ofS is just the integral of the absolute value of the (Gauss) curvature over S. For minimal surfaces of a ﬁxed topological type in a manifold with sectional curvature bounded above, a curvat ure bound follows from an area bound by Gauss–Bonnet. However, our surfaces St are minimal with respect to the gt metrics, which have no uniform upper bound on their sectiona l curvature, so we must work slightly harder to show that the th eSt have uniformly bounded total curvature. More precisely , we show that their restrictions to the complement of any ﬁxed tubular neighborhood Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded total curvature. Lemma 1.22 (Finite total curvature). LetSt be the surfaces constructed in Lemma 1.20. Fix some small, positive ǫ. Then the subsurfaces S′ t :=St∩ M\Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded total curvature. Proof. Having chosenǫ, we choose t large enough so that r(1− t)<ǫ/ 2. Observe ﬁrstly that each St hasgt area less that the gt area of S, and therefore hyperbolic area less that the hyperbolic area of S for sufﬁciently larget. Letτt,s = St∩ ∂N s(Γ) for small s. By the coarea formula (see [Fed],[CM] page 8) we can estimate area(St∩ (Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ)))≥ ∫ ǫ ǫ/ 2 length(τt,s )ds 12 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI If the integral of geodesic curvature along a component σ ofτt,ǫ is large, then the length of the curves obtained by isotoping σ intoSt∩ Nǫ(Γ) grows very rapidly , by the deﬁnition of geodesic curvature. Since there is an a priori bound on the hyperbolic area of St, it follows that there cannot be any long components of τt,s with big integral geodesic curvature. More precisely , consider a long component σ of τt,s . For l∈ [0,ǫ/ 2] the boundary σl of the l-neighborhood of σ in St∩ Nǫ(Γ) is contained in Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ). If the integral of the geodesic curvature along σl were sufﬁciently large for everyl, then the derivative of the length of the σl would be large for every l, and therefore the lengths of the σl would be large for all l∈ [ǫ/ 4,ǫ/ 2]. It follows that the hyperbolic area of the ǫ/ 2 collar neighborhood of σ in St would be very large, contrary to existence of an a priori upper bound on the total hyperbolic area of St. This contradiction implies that for somel, the integral of the geodesic curvature along σl can be bounded from above. T o summarize, for each constant C1 > 0 there is a constant C2 > 0, such that for each component σ ofτt,ǫ which has length ≥ C1 there is a loop σ ′⊂ St∩ (Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ)) isotopic toσ by a short isotopy , satisfying ∫ σ ′ κdl ≤ C2 On the other hand, since St isgt minimal, there is a constant C1 > 0 such that each componentσ ofτt,ǫ which has length≤ C1 bounds a hyperbolic globally least area disk which is contained inM\Nǫ/ 2(Γ). For t sufﬁciently close to 1, such a disk is contained in M\Nr(1− t)(Γ), and therefore must actually be a subdisk of St. By the coarea formula above, we can choose ǫ so that length(τt,s ) is a priori bounded. It follows that if S′′ t is the subsurface of