products annu lus× R+ where the product structure is compatible with the product struct ure on the cusp. If N is obtained from a complete hyperbolic manifold by neutering, then this neutering should restrict to a neutering of W . Here is the parabolic version of Lemma 2.3. The reader may wan t to refresh their memory by ﬁrst rereading Lemma 2.3: SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 53 Lemma 7.12 (Parabolic construction lemma) . LetE be an end of the complete open orientable irreducible Riemannian 3–manifold N with metric µ , with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, and neutering N0 with parabolic locus P . Let W ⊂ N be a submanifold such that ∂W ∩ int(N ) separates W fromE, and whose ends are standardly embedded cusps in the cusps of N . Let ∆1⊂ N0\∂W be a ﬁnite collection of simple closed geodesics with ∆ = W∩ ∆1 a non–empty proper subset of ∆1. Suppose futher that ∂W is 2–incompressible rel. ∆ and has no P –essential annuli disjoint from ∆1. Let the Riemannian metric µ on N agree with a hyperbolic metric outside tubular neighborhoodsNǫ(∆1) and inside tubular neighborhoods Nǫ/ 2(∆1), having ∆1 as core geodesics, and such thatµ is a metric with sectional curvature pinched between− 1. 01 and − 0. 99. LetG be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(W ), and let X be the covering space of W corresponding to G. Let Σ be the preimage of ∆ inX with ˆ∆⊂ Σ a subset which maps homeomorphically onto ∆ under the covering projection, and let B⊂ ˆ∆ be a nonempty union of geodesics. Suppose there exists a properly embedde d surface S ⊂ X\B of ﬁnite topological type, whose ends are standard cusps in the c usps of X such that S is 2–incompressible rel. B inX and has no P -essential annuli disjoint from B, and which separates every component of B from∂X . Then∂W can be properly homotoped to a ∆1–minimal surface which, by abuse of notation, we call ∂W ′, and the map of S intoN given by the covering projection is properly homotopic to a map whose image T ′ is ∆1–minimal and whose ends exit the cusps of N . Also,∂W ′ (resp.T ′) can be perturbed by an arbitrarily small perturbation to be an embedded (resp. smoothly immersed) surface ∂W t (resp.Tt) boundingWt with the following properties: (1) There exists a proper isotopy from ∂W to ∂W t which never crosses ∆1, and which induces a proper isotopy from W toWt, and a corresponding deformation of pinched negatively curved manifolds X toXt which ﬁxes Σ pointwise. (2) There exists a proper isotopy from S toSt⊂ Xt which never crossesB, such that Tt is the projection of St toN . (3) Each of the limit surfaces F ∈{ ∂W ′,T ′} relatively exits the manifold as its restriction exits the neutered part. That is, if C is a rank 1 cusp foliated by totally geodesic 2 dimensional cuspsC× R perpendicular to the boundary annulus S1× R, then if the intersection ofF with∂C is contained in the regionS1× [t,∞ ), the intersection of F withC is contained in the region C× [t,∞ ), and similarly if the intersection is contained in S1× (−∞ ,t ]. Proof. The essential differences between the statements of Lemma 2.3 and Lemma 7.12 are ﬁrstly that the metric in the parabolic case is pinched, s o that the geodesics can be chosen to be simple; secondly that the surfaces in questio n are all properly embedded, and the isotopies and homotopies are all proper; and thirdly that the limit surfaces relatively exit the manifold as their restriction exits the neutered part. These issues are all minor, and do not introduce any real comp lications in the proof. The only question whose answer might not be immediatl y apparent is how to perturb the metricµ to thegt metrics near cusps; it turns out that this is straightforward to do, and technically easier than deformations alo ng geodesics, since the perturbed metrics actually have curvature bounded above by 0. W e will ﬁnd an exhaustion ofN by increasingly larger neutered spacesN t 0, each endowed with a metric gt, which is obtained from the µ -metric by deforming it along the geodesics ∆1 and along∂N t 0. Our∂W t will restrict togt-area minimizing 54 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI representatives of the isotopy class of ∂W∩ N t 0. The convergence and regularity of the limit surface ∂W ′ near the geodesics will proceed exactly as in §1 and§2. The convegence and regularity in the cusps will follow from §1 using the absence ofP -essential annuli disjoint from ∆1. T o describe the deformed geometry along the cusps, we ﬁrst re call the usual hyperbolic geometry of the (rank 1) cusps. W e parameterize a rank 1 cuspC as S1× [1,∞ )× R, where the initial S1× [1,∞ ) factor is a 2–dimensional cusp C. With the hyperbolic metric, the three co–ordinate vector ﬁe lds are orthogonal; we denote these by ∂ ∂θ, ∂ ∂z and ∂ ∂y respectively , so thatθ∈ S1,z∈ [1,∞ ) andy∈ R. An orthonormal basis in the hyperbolic metric is z ∂ ∂θ,z ∂ ∂z,z ∂ ∂y . Let h : R+→ R+ be a monotone increasing function with h(z) = z forz <1, andh(z) = 2 forz≥ 3. Then let ht(z) = 1 1− th((1− t)z) and deﬁnegt onC to be the metric with orthonormal basisht(z) ∂ ∂θ,h t(z) ∂ ∂z,h t(z) ∂ ∂y . Notice that the group of Euclidean symmetries of the boundar y∂C extends to an isometry ofC for thegt metric, for all t. In particular, the surface Hs =S1× [1,∞ )× s is totally geodesic for the gt metric, and therefore acts as a barrier surface for allt. Moreover, ast→ 1, the gt metrics converge to the hyperbolic metrics on compact subsets, and in fact for every compact K⊂C , there is an s >0 such that the gt and the hyperbolic metrics agree for t≤ s. Finally , for each t > 0, the subset S1× [3/ (1− t),∞ )× R⊂C is isometric to a Euclidean product, for the gt metric, and therefore the surface Ft =S1× 3 1− t× R is totally geodesic for the gt metric, and also acts as a barrier surface. Finally , notice that thegt metrics lift to a family of isometric metrics on H3, and by the symmetries above, therefore have uniformly pinched s ectional curvatures, and are uniformly bilipschitz to the hyperbolic metric in th e region bounded away from the cusps by Ft. LetN t 0 be the neutered space whose boundary consists of the surfaces of typeFt constructed above. Endow N t 0 with thegt metric. Now apply [MSY], as in Lemma 2.3, to the surface ∂W∩N t 0 to obtain the surface∂W 1 t which isgt-least area among all surfaces properly isotopic to ∂W∩ N t 0. By extending ∂W 1 t vertically we obtain the surface ∂W t⊂ N which is properly isotopic to ∂W . As in Lemma 2.3 these surfaces weakly converge geometrically to a surface ∂W ′. W e will