metric induced by the Riemannian metric on M . W e use some basic analytical tools throughout this section,including the Gauss– Bonnet formula, the coarea formula, and the Arzela–Ascoli t heorem. At a number of points we must invoke results from the literature to estab lish existence of minimal surfaces ([MSY]), existence of limits with area and cur vature control ([CiSc]), and regularity of the shrinkwrapped surfaces along Γ ([Ri],[Fre]). General references are [CM], [Js] [Fed] and [B]. 1.1. Geometry of surfaces. For convenience, we state some elementary but fundamental lemmas concerning curvature of (smooth) surfaces in Riemannian 3manifolds. W e use the following standard terms to refer to different kin ds of minimal surfaces: Deﬁnition 1.1. A smooth surface Σ in a Riemannian 3-manifold is minimal if it is a critical point for area with respect to all smooth compactl y supported variations. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 5 It is locally least area (also called stable) if it is a local minimum for area with respect to all smooth, compactly supported variations. A closed, em bedded surface is globally least area if it is an absolute minimum for area amongst all smooth surfa ces in its isotopy class. Note that we do not require that our minimal or locally least a rea surfaces are complete. Any subsurface of a globally least area surface is locally le ast area, and a locally least area surface is minimal. A smooth surface is minimal if f its mean curvature vector ﬁeld vanishes identically . For more details, consult [CM], especially chapter 5. The intrinsic curvature of a minimal surface is controlled b y the geometry of the ambient manifold. The following lemma is formula 5.6 on p age 100 of [CM]. Lemma 1.2 (Monotonicity of curvature) . Let Σ be a minimal surface in a Riemannian manifoldM . Let KΣ denote the curvature of Σ, and KM the sectional curvature of M . Then restricted to the tangent space T Σ, KΣ =KM− 1 2|A|2 whereA denotes the second fundamental form of Σ. In particular, if the Riemannian curvature onM is bounded from above by some constantK, then the curvature of a minimal surface Σ inM is also bounded above byK. The following lemma is just the usual Gauss–Bonnet formula: Lemma 1.3 (Gauss–Bonnet formula). Let Σ be aC3 Riemannian surface with (possibly empty)C3 boundary ∂Σ. Let KΣ denote the Gauss curvature of Σ, and κ the geodesic curvature along∂Σ. Then ∫ Σ KΣ = 2πχ (Σ)− ∫ ∂ Σ κdl Many simple proofs exist in the literature. For example, see [Js]. If∂Σ is merely piecewise C3, with ﬁnitely many corners pi and external angles α i, the Gauss–Bonnet formula must be modiﬁed as follows: Lemma 1.4 (Gauss–Bonnet with corners) . Let Σ be a C3 Riemannian surface with boundary∂Σ which is piecewiseC3, and has external angles α i at ﬁnitely many pointspi. LetKΣ andκ be as above. Then∫ Σ KΣ = 2πχ (Σ)− ∫ ∂ Σ κdl− ∑ i α i Observe forabc a geodesic triangle with external anglesα 1,α 2,α 3 that Lemma 1.4 implies ∫ abc K = 2π− ∑ i α i Notice that the geodesic curvature κ vanishes precisely when ∂Σ is a geodesic, that is, a critical point for the length functional. More gen erally , letν be the normal bundle of ∂Σ in Σ, oriented so that the inward unit normal is a positive sectio n. The exponential map restricted to ν deﬁnes a map φ :∂Σ× [0,ǫ ]→ Σ 6 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI for small ǫ, where φ(·, 0) = Id|∂ Σ, and φ(∂Σ,t ) for small t is the boundary in Σ of the tubulart neighborhood of∂Σ. Then ∫ ∂ Σ κdl =− d dt ⏐ ⏐ ⏐ t=0 length(φ t(∂Σ)) Note that if Σ is a surface with sectional curvature bounded above by − 1, then by integrating this formula we see that the ball Bt(p) of radiust in Σ about a point p∈ Σ satisﬁes area(Bt(p))≥ 2π (cosh(t)− 1)>πt 2 for smallt> 0. 1.2. Comparison geometry . For basic elements of the theory of comparison geometry , see [BH]. Deﬁnition 1.5 (Comparison triangle) . Leta1a2a3 be a geodesic triangle in a geodesic metric space X. Let κ∈ R be given. A κ–comparison triangle is a geodesic triangle a1a2a3 in the complete simply–connected Riemannian 2–manifold of constant sectional curvature κ, where the edges aiaj andaiaj satisfy length(aiaj) = length(aiaj) Given a point x∈ a1a2 on one of the edges of a1a2a3, there is a corresponding pointx∈ a1a2 on one of the edges of the comparison triangle, satisfying length(a1x) = length(a1x) and length(xa2) = length(xa2) Remark 1.6. Note that if κ > 0, the comparison triangle might not exist if the edge lengths are too big, but if κ≤ 0 the comparison triangle always exists, and is unique up to isometry . There is a slight issue of terminology to be aware of here. In a surface, a triangle is a polygonal disk with 3 geodesic edges. In a path metric space , a triangle is just a union of 3 geodesic segments with common endpoints. Deﬁnition 1.7 (CAT(κ)). Let S be a closed surface with a path metric g. Let ˜S denote the universal cover of ˜S, with path metric induced by the pullback of the path metric g. Let κ ∈ R be given. S is said to be CAT(κ) if for every geodesic triangleabc in ˜S, and every point z on the edge bc, the distance in ˜S froma toz is no more than the distance from a toz in aκ–comparison triangle. By Lemma 1.4 applied to geodesic triangles, one can show that aC3 surface Σ with sectional curvatureKΣ satisfyingKΣ≤ κ everywhere is CAT(κ) with respect to the Riemannian path metric. This fact is essentially due t o Alexandrov; see [B] for a proof. More generally , suppose Σ is a surface which is C3 outside a closed, nowhere dense subset X ⊂ Σ. Furthermore, suppose that KΣ ≤ κ holds in Σ\X, and suppose that the formula from Lemma 1.4 holds for every geode sic triangle with vertices in Σ\X (which is a dense set of geodesic triangles). Then the same ar gument shows that Σ is CAT(κ). See e.g. [Re] §8, pp. 135–140 for more details, and a general discussion of metric surfaces with (integral) curv ature bounds. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 7 Deﬁnition 1.8 (Γ–minimal surfaces) . Let κ ∈ R be given. Let M be a complete Riemannian 3–manifold with sectional curvature bounded above by κ, and let Γ be an embedded collection of simple closed geodesics in M . An immersion ψ :S→ M is Γ–minimal if it is smooth with mean curvature 0 in M\Γ, and is metrically CAT(κ) with respect to the path metric induced by ψ from the Riemannian metric onM . Notice by Lemma 1.2 that a smooth surface S with mean curvature 0 in M is CAT(κ), so a minimal surface (in the usual sense) is an example of a Γ–minimal surface. 1.3. Statement of shrinkwrapping theorem. Deﬁnition 1.9 (2–incompressibility). An embedded surface S in a 3–manifoldM disjoint from a collection Γ