= Id|∂ Σ, and φ(∂Σ,t ) for small t is the boundary in Σ of the tubulart neighborhood of∂Σ. Then ∫ ∂ Σ κdl =− d dt ⏐ ⏐ ⏐ t=0 length(φ t(∂Σ)) Note that if Σ is a surface with sectional curvature bounded above by − 1, then by integrating this formula we see that the ball Bt(p) of radiust in Σ about a point p∈ Σ satisﬁes area(Bt(p))≥ 2π (cosh(t)− 1)>πt 2 for smallt> 0. 1.2. Comparison geometry . For basic elements of the theory of comparison geometry , see [BH]. Deﬁnition 1.5 (Comparison triangle) . Leta1a2a3 be a geodesic triangle in a geodesic metric space X. Let κ∈ R be given. A κ–comparison triangle is a geodesic triangle a1a2a3 in the complete simply–connected Riemannian 2–manifold of constant sectional curvature κ, where the edges aiaj andaiaj satisfy length(aiaj) = length(aiaj) Given a point x∈ a1a2 on one of the edges of a1a2a3, there is a corresponding pointx∈ a1a2 on one of the edges of the comparison triangle, satisfying length(a1x) = length(a1x) and length(xa2) = length(xa2) Remark 1.6. Note that if κ > 0, the comparison triangle might not exist if the edge lengths are too big, but if κ≤ 0 the comparison triangle always exists, and is unique up to isometry . There is a slight issue of terminology to be aware of here. In a surface, a triangle is a polygonal disk with 3 geodesic edges. In a path metric space , a triangle is just a union of 3 geodesic segments with common endpoints. Deﬁnition 1.7 (CAT(κ)). Let S be a closed surface with a path metric g. Let ˜S denote the universal cover of ˜S, with path metric induced by the pullback of the path metric g. Let κ ∈ R be given. S is said to be CAT(κ) if for every geodesic triangleabc in ˜S, and every point z on the edge bc, the distance in ˜S froma toz is no more than the distance from a toz in aκ–comparison triangle. By Lemma 1.4 applied to geodesic triangles, one can show that aC3 surface Σ with sectional curvatureKΣ satisfyingKΣ≤ κ everywhere is CAT(κ) with respect to the Riemannian path metric. This fact is essentially due t o Alexandrov; see [B] for a proof. More generally , suppose Σ is a surface which is C3 outside a closed, nowhere dense subset X ⊂ Σ. Furthermore, suppose that KΣ ≤ κ holds in Σ\X, and suppose that the formula from Lemma 1.4 holds for every geode sic triangle with vertices in Σ\X (which is a dense set of geodesic triangles). Then the same ar gument shows that Σ is CAT(κ). See e.g. [Re] §8, pp. 135–140 for more details, and a general discussion of metric surfaces with (integral) curv ature bounds. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 7 Deﬁnition 1.8 (Γ–minimal surfaces) . Let κ ∈ R be given. Let M be a complete Riemannian 3–manifold with sectional curvature bounded above by κ, and let Γ be an embedded collection of simple closed geodesics in M . An immersion ψ :S→ M is Γ–minimal if it is smooth with mean curvature 0 in M\Γ, and is metrically CAT(κ) with respect to the path metric induced by ψ from the Riemannian metric onM . Notice by Lemma 1.2 that a smooth surface S with mean curvature 0 in M is CAT(κ), so a minimal surface (in the usual sense) is an example of a Γ–minimal surface. 1.3. Statement of shrinkwrapping theorem. Deﬁnition 1.9 (2–incompressibility). An embedded surface S in a 3–manifoldM disjoint from a collection Γ of simple closed curves is said to be 2–incompressible rel. Γ if any essential compressing disk for S must intersect Γ in at least two points. If Γ is understood, we say S is 2–incompressible. Theorem 1.10 (Existence of shrinkwrapped surface). LetM be a complete, orientable, parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in M . Further, let S⊂ M\Γ be a closed embedded 2–incompressible surface rel. Γ which is either nonseparating in M or separates some component of Γ from another. ThenS is homotopic to a Γ–minimal surfaceT via a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M such that (1) F (S× 0) = S (2) F (S× t) = St is an embedding disjoint from Γ for 0≤ t< 1 (3) F (S× 1) = T (4) IfT ′ is any other surface with these properties, then area (T )≤ area(T ′) We say that T is obtained from S by shrinkwrapping rel. Γ, or if Γ is understood, T is obtained fromS by shrinkwrapping. The remainder of this section will be taken up with the proof o f Theorem 1.10. Remark 1.11. In fact, for our applications, the property we want to use of o ur surface T is that we can estimate its diameter (rel. the thin part of M ) from its Euler characteristic. This follows from a Gauss–Bonnet est imate and the bounded diameter lemma (Lemma 1.15, to be proved below). In fact, our argument will show directly that the surface T satisﬁes Gauss–Bonnet; the fact that it is CAT (− 1) is logically superﬂuous for the purposes of this paper. 1.4. Deforming metrics along geodesics. Deﬁnition 1.12 (δ–separation). Let Γ be a collection of disjoint simple geodesics in a Riemannian manifold M . The collection Γ isδ–separated if any path α : I→ M with endpoints on Γ and satisfying length(α (I))≤ δ 8 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI is homotopic rel. endpoints into Γ. The supremum of such δ is called the separation constant of Γ. The collection Γ is weaklyδ–separated if dist(γ,γ ′)>δ wheneverγ,γ ′ are distinct components of Γ. The supremum of such δ is called the weak separation constant of Γ. Deﬁnition 1.13 (Neighborhood and tube neighborhood) . Letr >0 be given. For a point x∈ M , we let Nr(x) denote the closed ball of radius r about x, and let N<r(x),∂N r(x) denote respectively the interior and the boundary of Nr(x). For a closed geodesic γ inM , we let Nr(γ) denote the closed tube of radius r aboutγ, and letN<r(γ),∂N r(γ) denote respectively the interior and the boundary ofNr(γ). If Γ denotes a union of geodesics γi, then we use the shorthand notation Nr(Γ) = ⋃ γ i Nr(γi) Remark 1.14. T opologically ,∂N r(x) is a sphere and ∂N r(γ) is a torus, for sufﬁciently small r. Similarly ,Nr(x) is a closed ball, and Nr(γ) is a closed solid torus. If Γ isδ–separated, thenNδ/ 2(Γ) is a union of solid tori. Lemma 1.15 (Bounded Diameter Lemma). LetM be a complete hyperbolic 3–manifold. Let Γ be a disjoint collection of δ–separated embedded geodesics. Let ǫ >0 be a Margulis constant for dimension 3, and letM≤ ǫ denote the subset of M where the injectivity radius is at most ǫ. If S⊂ M\Γ is a 2–incompressible Γ–minimal surface, then there is a constantC =C(χ (S),ǫ,δ )∈ R andn =n(χ (S),ǫ,δ )∈ Z such that for each component Si ofS∩ (M\M≤ ǫ), we have diam(Si)≤ C Furthermore,S can only intersect at most n components ofM≤ ǫ. Proof. Since