closed loop γ, we can straighten any smooth, proper, incompressible map g′ of int(S) to N to a simplicial hyperbolic surface with associated triangulation T . First we straighteng′ so it maps γ to its geodesic representative. Then, straightening g′ on the edges of T rel-endpoints (possibly ideal endpoints) and then on faces of T , we obtain a map g : int(S) → N . The pull-back metric from N determines a singular hyperbolic surface Z with a cone singularity at v; since v lies on a closed geodesic that is mapped to a closed geodesic in N , the cone angle at v is at least 2 π . The result is a simplicial hyperbolic surface ( g,Z ) in N with associated triangulation T . In this case we say that ( g,Z ) is adapted to γ. Let (f : S → N ) ∈ AH(S). Then we denote by SHk(N ) the marking preserving simplicial hyperbolic surfaces in N with at most k cone-singularities, namely, simplicial hyperbolic surfaces ( g,Z ), with ( h : int(S) → Z) ∈ Singk(S), so that g ◦h is homotopic to f . If σ is a simplex in C(S) with vertices α 1,...,α p, then we say a simplicial hyperbolic surface ( g,Z ) ∈ SH k(N ) realizesσ if g maps each αi isometrically to its geodesic representative in N . Recall that a manifold ( f : S → N ) ∈ AH(S) has an accidental parabolic if there is a non-peripheral element γ ∈ π1(S) so that f∗(γ) is a parabolic element of Isom +(H3). Applying Hatcher’s theorem [Hat] allowing one to connect triangulations by elementary moves, Canary proves the following (see [Ca n3, §5, §6]; compare [Br1, §3] and [Min, §4]): 20 JEFFREY F. BROCK Theorem 4.6 (Canary). Let N ∈ AH(S) have no accidental parabolics, and let (g1,Z 1) and (g2,Z 2) lie in SH1(N ) where (g1,Z 1) is adapted to α and (g2,Z 2) is adapted toβ . Then there is a continuous family (gt : Zt → N ) ⊂ SH 2(N ),t ∈ [1, 2]. Using such an interpolation, we now give the proof of Lemma 4.2. Proof: (of Lemma 4.2). Given the quasi-Fuchsian manifold Q(X,Y ), let PX and PY denote pants decompositions for which X lies in V (PX ) and Y lies in V (PY ). Then by a theorem of Bers ([Brs2, Thm. 3], [Mc1, Prop. 6.4]), we have ℓQ(X,Y )(α )< 2L for each curve α in PX ∪ PY . Let ZX and ZY denote simplicial hyperbolic surfaces realizing PX and PY in Q(X,Y ) and let TX and TY denote their associated triangulations. Let Z h X ∈ Teich(S) be the hyperbolic surface conformally equivalent to ZX , and let Z h Y be the hyperbolic surface conformally equivalent to ZY . Finally, let PI and PT be pants decompositions so that Z h X ∈ V (PI ) and Z h Y ∈ V (PT ). The next step will be to interpolate simplicial hyperbolic surfaces bet ween ZX and ZY and estimate the minimum number of sets V (Pj) the corresponding conformally equivalent hyperbolic representatives in Teich( S) intersect. To show we have not sacriﬁced too much distance in the pants graph, we prove the following: Lemma 4.7. There is a constant B′> 0 depending only on S so that max {dP(PX,P I ),d P(PY,P T )}<B ′. Proof: We have ℓZX (γ)< 2L for each γ ∈ PX . By a lemma of Ahlfors [Ah] we have ℓZh X (β ) ≥ ℓZX (β ) for each β ∈ S. Thus, we have ℓZX (α )< 2L for each α ∈ PX ∪PI . Since curves in PX ∪PI are realized with bounded length on the simplicial hyperbolic surface ZX ∈ SH k(Q(X,Y )), we may apply [Br1, Lem. 3.3] to ﬁnd a C′> 0 depending only on L so that i(PX,P I )<C ′. Arguing similarly for ZY , we have i(PY,P T )<C ′. Applying the proof of Theorem 3.3, we have a B′> 0 depending only on C′ for which max{dP(PX,P I ),d P(PY,P T )}<B ′. THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 21 To complete the proof of Lemma 4.2, we seek a continuous family (ht : Zt → Q(X,Y )) ⊂ SH k(Q(X,Y )) of simplicial hyperbolic surfaces in Q(X,Y ) interpolating between ( hX,Z X ) and (hY,Z Y ). We ﬁrst connect ( hX,Z X ) and (hY,Z Y ) to simplicial hyperbolic surfaces (h′ X,Z ′ X ) and (h′ Y,Z ′ Y ) adapted to single curves α ∈ PX andβ ∈ PY by continuous families, and then apply the interpolation arguments of Canary. This is easily done by collapsing edges of TX that join distinct vertices of TX down to a single vertex: if e is such an edge adjacent to a vertex v on α , then we may eﬀect such a collapsing by ‘dragging hX along hX (e)’ (see [Can3, §5]). Precisely, if v′ is the other vertex in ∂e, we construct a homotopy of ( hX,Z X) to a new simplicial hyperbolic surface by pulling the image hX (v′) along the geodesic segmenthX (e) to hX (v) and pulling the edges and faces adjacent to v along with it while keeping the triangulation straight: the image of each triangle is required to lift to the convex hull of its vertices throughout the homotopy. It is easy to check that under such a collapsing the cone angles at th e vertices remain at least 2 π , and the number of vertices in T is reduced by 1. We successively collapse edges joining v to diﬀerent vertices until we are left with a triangulation with the single vertex v, and a simplicial hyperbolic surface ( h′ X,Z ′ X ) ∈ SH1(Q(X,Y )) adapted to α . We perform analogous collapsings on the associated triangulation fo r (hY,Z Y ) to obtain the simplicial hyperbolic surface ( h′ Y,Z ′ Y ) ∈ SH 1(Q(X,Y )) adapted to β . By Theorem 4.6, we may interpolate between ( h′ X,Z ′ X ) and (h′ Y,Z ′ Y ) by a continuous family of simplicial hyperbolic surfaces, so we have the desire d continuous family (ht : Zt → C(X,Y )) ⊂ SH k(Q(X,Y )), t ∈ [0, 1] so that (h0,Z 0) = (hX,Z X ) and (h1,Z 1) = (hY,Z Y ). The singular hyperbolic structures Zt determine a continuous path (hh t : int(S) → Z h t ) ⊂ Teich(S), where as beforeZ h t is the ﬁnite-area hyperbolic structure on S in the same conformal class as Zt. Since Zt and Z h t represent metrics on the same underlying surface int(S), we have a natural continuous family of 1-Lipschitz mappings ˆht : Z h t → C(X,Y ) of hyperbolic surfaces Z h t ∈ Teich(S) into Q(X,Y ) so that for each t, ˆht factors through the simplicial hyperbolic surface ht : Zt → C(X,Y ). There are pants decompositions P1,...,P N (possibly with repetition) that determine an