is an atoroidal Haken manifold with nonzero Euler characteristic, it follows by Thurston that i nt(Xi) is topologically tame (see Proposition 3.2 [Ca]). By [Tu2] a compactiﬁcation ¯Xi of int(Xi) extends int(Xi)∪ ∂h ˆF∪ ∂p ˆF , where ˆF is the lift of F to Xi. Since ˆF is a core of ¯Xi it follows that ¯Xi is a union of a closed (possibly disconnected or empty) orien table surface× I with 1-handles attached to the surface× 1 side. Let ¯Si denote the unique boundary component of ¯Xi which is not a closed component of ˆF . Push ¯Si\int( ˆF∩ ∂ ¯Xi) slightly to obtain a properly embedded surface ˆSi⊂ Xi with∂ ˆSi =∂δ ˆF via a homotopy disjoint from ˆΓi. Being connected with the same Euler characteristic and same number of boundary components, ˆSi is of the same topological type as δF . Let ˆZ ′′ i ⊂ ¯Xi be the compact region with frontier ˆSi. Letχ :=|χ ( ˆSi)|=|χ (δF )|. Deﬁne∂pXi and∂hXi the respective preimages of ∂pWi and∂hWi. LetW ′ i denoteWi together with the components of N0\int(M ) which hit ∂W 1. Let Yi be the cover of W ′ i with π1(Yi) = Gi. As in the parabolic free case, Xi naturally embeds in Yi and the inclusion is a homotopy equivalence. Deﬁne ∂pYi to be the preimage of∂pW ′ i . Note that δWi, the frontier ofWi⊂ M equalsδW ′ i , the frontier ofW ′ i inN0. If possible compress ˆZ ′′ i along δ ˆZ ′′ i = ˆSi via compressions that hit ˆΓi at most once. Continue in this manner to obtain the region ˆZ ′ i whose frontier is 2-incompressible rel ˆBi := ˆΓi\{γi1,···,γ im} where both m and|χ (δ ˆZ ′ i)|≤ χ . Since Xi\ˆΓi is irreducible, we can assume that no component of ∂ ˆZ ′ i is a 2-sphere. 56 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Before we shrinkwrap δW ′ i and δ ˆZ ′ i we need to annulate them, i.e. compress them along essential annuli into P and ∂pYi. Geometrically we are eliminating accidental parabolics so that we can invoke Lemma 7.12. LetL1,···,L k be a maximal collection of pairwise disjoint, embedded, ess ential annuli in N0 disjoint from Γi such that for each j, ∂L j has one component onδW ′ i and one component on P . Furthermore assume that int (Li)∩ δW ′ i =∅. Now annulate δW ′ i along each Li to obtain the surface δW L i . So if Li lies to the outside of W ′ i , then the effect on Wi is to add N (Li). If Li⊂ W ′ i andLi× I is a product neighborhood, then this annulation deletesLi× int(I) fromW ′ i . There are no P -essential annuli for δW L i disjoint from Γi and ∂W L i is 2-incompressible rel Γi. Indeed, since δW L i is embedded and 2-incompressible, we need only consider embeddedP -essential annuli, by the generalized Loop theorem. The mod iﬁcation W ′ i→ W L i induces a modiﬁcation of Yi as follows. If Lj annulatesW ′ i to the outside, then enlarge Yi in the natural way . This will enlarge the parabolic boundary ∂pYi. If δW ′ i gets annulated to the inside, then do not change Yi. By abuse of notation, we relabel the space obtained from Yi as Yi. Let W l i denote Wi modiﬁed only along outer P -essential annuli. Note that Yi is a covering space of W l i . In like manner, annulateδ ˆZ ′ i along a maximal collection of pairwise disjoint annuli which are disjoint from ˆBi. Let ˆZi⊂ Yi denote the result of annulating ˆZ ′ i. Note that ˆZi can be constructed so that there are no ∂pYi-essential annuli for δ ˆZi disjoint from ˆBi. Now ﬁx i. Let γ∈ Γ\W L i . Apply Lemma 7.12 using the following dictionary between our setting and the setting of Lemma 7.12: δ ˆZi corresponds to the surfaceS,W L i corresponds to W, Yi corresponds to X,γ∪ Γi corresponds to ∆1, Γi corresponds to ∆, and ˆBi corresponds to B. W e conclude that if Si denotes the projection of δ ˆZi intoN , then Si is homotopic to a CAT (− 1) surfaceT i with the following properties. The surface T i is homotopic to a surface P i⊂ W new i where W new i is isotopic toW l i andP i lifts to an embedded surface ˆP i⊂ Y new i , whereY new i is the corresponding cover of W new i . The isotopy of W new i toW l i induces a deformation of spacesY new i toYi which ﬁxes ˆBi pointwise. Futhermore, ˆP i is isotopic to the correspondingδ ˆZi via an isotopy disjoint from ˆBi. Given ǫ> 0, the P i can be chosen so that the homotopy of T i toP i restricted toN ǫ 0 lies in anǫ-neighborhood ofP i∩N ǫ 0. By abuse of notation we will view ˆP i as bounding the region ˆZi⊂ Y new i and we will drop the superscripts new , etc. Let{α i} be a locally ﬁnite collection of embedded proper rays in N0 toE emanating from{γi}. Letπ : Yi→ N be the composition of the covering map to W l i and inclusion. Let Bi = π ( ˆBi). If b∈ Bi and is disjoint from N (P i, 1), then some component ofT i homologically separates b fromE. Indeed if α b is the ray from b toE, then π − 1(α b)∩ ˆZi is a ﬁnite union of compact segments. If both endpoints lie in∂Y i, then it contributes nothing to the algebraic intersection numbe r⟨α b,P i⟩. Otherwise it has one endpoint in π − 1(α b) and one in ∂Y i and hence contributes +1. Therefore ⟨α b,T i⟩ =⟨α b,P i⟩> 0. Since|Bi|→∞ , the Bi’s are weakly 1000 separating and the T i’s have uniformly bounded area, it follows that for i sufﬁciently large, some b∈ Bi\Bji is disjoint SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 57 fromN (P i, 1), where ji < iand lim i→∞ ji =∞ . Therefore some subsequence of components of{T i} exitsE. By reducingǫ, if necessary , we can assume that∂N ǫ 0 is transverse to all the T i’s. By Lemma 7.11, for each i, each component of T i∩ (N\int(N0)) is either a disc or a half open annulus. Therefore, the restriction of each comp onent of T i toN0 is a connected surface. Lemma 7.13. LetM be a relative end-manifold with core C of the form ∂hM× I∪ 1− handles. Let Z denote the closure of M− C with∂pZ =∂pM∩ Z and∂EZ =∂EC. (1) Z is Thurston norm minimizing in H2(Z,∂ pZ) = Z. (2) IfR is a Thurston norm minimizing surface (in either the singula r or embedded norms), representing [∂EZ]∈ H2(Z,∂ pZ), then for each component Q of∂pZ we have|R∩ Q|= 1. In particular, R has noP -essential annuli in Z. Corollary 7.14. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with neutering N0 and relative core C