St bounded by the components of τt,s of length > C1 then we have a priori upper bounds on the area of S′′ t , on ∫ ∂S ′′ t κdl , and on −χ (S′′ t ). Moreover, S′′ t is contained in M\Nr(1− t) where the metricgt agrees with the hyperbolic metric, so the curvature K ofS′′ t is bounded above by− 1 pointwise, by Lemma 1.2. By the Gauss–Bonnet formula, this g ives an a priori upper bound on the total curvature of S′′ t , and therefore onS′ t⊂ S′′ t . □ Remark 1.23. A more highbrow proof of Lemma 1.22 follows from Theorem 1 of [S], using the fact that the surfaces S′ t are locally least area for the hyperbolic metric, fort sufﬁciently close to 1 (depending onǫ). Lemma 1.24 (Limit exists) . Let St be the surfaces constructed in Lemma 1.20. Then there is an increasing sequence 0<t 1<t 2<··· such that limi→∞ ti = 1 , and the Sti converge on compact subsets of M\Γ in the C∞ topology to some T ′⊂ M\Γ with closureT inM . Proof. By deﬁnition, the surfaces St havegt area bounded above by the gt area of S. Moreover, since S is disjoint from Γ, for sufﬁciently large t, the gt area of S is equal to the hyperbolic area of S. Since the gt area dominates the hyperbolic area, it follows that the St have hyperbolic area bounded above, and by Lemma 1.22, for any ǫ, the restrictions of St to M\Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded ﬁnite total curvature. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 13 Moreover, by Lemma 1.21, each St is contained in a ﬁxed compact subset of M . By standard compactness theorems (see e.g. [CiSc]) any inﬁ nite sequence Sti contains a subsequence which converges on compact subsets o fE\Γ, away from ﬁnitely many points where some subsurface with nontrivial t opology might collapse. That is, there might be isolated points p such that for any neighborhood U ofp, the intersection of Sti withU contains loops which are essential in Sti for all sufﬁcient largei. But S is 2–incompressible rel. Γ, so in particular it is incompressible in M\Γ, and no such collapse can take place. So after passing to a subs equence, a limit T ′⊂ M\Γ exists (compare [MSY]). Since each St is a globally least area surface inM\Nf (t)(Γ) with respect to the gt metric, it is a locally least area surface with respect to the hyperbolic metric on M\Nr(1− t)(Γ). It follows that T ′ is locally least area in the hyperbolic metric, properly embedded in M\Γ, and we can deﬁne T to be the closure of T ′ inM . □ Lemma 1.25 (Interpolating isotopy). Let{ti} be the sequence as in Lemma 1.24. Then after possibly passing to a subsequence, there is an isotopy F : S× [0, 1)→ M\Γ such that F (S,t i) = Sti and such that for each p∈ S the track of the isotopy F (p, [0, 1)) either converges to some well–deﬁned limit F (p, 1)∈ M\Γ or else it is eventually contained in Nǫ(Γ) for any ǫ> 0. Proof. Fix some smallǫ. Outside Nǫ(Γ), the surfaces Sti converge uniformly in the C∞ topology toT ′. It follows that for any ǫ, and fori sufﬁciently large (depending onǫ), the restrictions ofSti andSti+1 to the complement of Nǫ(Γ) are both sections of the exponentiated unit normal bundle of T ′\Nǫ(Γ), and therefore we can isotope these subsets of Sti toSti+1 along the ﬁbers of the normal bundle. W e wish to patch this partial isotopy together with a partial isotop y supported in a small neighborhood ofNǫ(Γ) to deﬁne the correct isotopy from Sti toSti+1. Let Z be obtained from Nǫ(Γ) by isotoping it slightly into M\Nǫ(Γ) so that it is transverse to T , and therefore also to Sti fori sufﬁciently large. For each i, we consider the intersection τi =Sti∩ ∂Z and observe that the limit satisﬁes lim i→∞ τi =τ =T∩ ∂Z Let σ be a component of τ which is inessential in ∂Z . Then for large i, σ can be approximated by σi ⊂ τi which are inessential in ∂Z . Since the Sti are 2– incompressible rel. Γ, the loops σi must bound subdisks Di ofSti. Since ∂Z is a convex surface with respect to the hyperbolic metric, and th egt metric agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Z for larget, it follows that the disks Di are actually contained inZ\Γ for largei. It follows that Di andDi+1 are isotopic by an isotopy supported inZ\Γ, which restricts to a very small isotopy of σi toσi+1 in∂Z . Let σ be a component of τ which is essential in ∂Z . Then so is σi for large i. Again, since S, and therefore Sti is 2–incompressible rel. Γ, it follows that σi cannot be a meridian of ∂Z , and must actually be a longitude. It follows that there is another essential curve σ ′ i in each τi, such that the essential curves σ ′ i and σi 14 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI cobound a subsurface Ai inSti∩ Z\Γ. After passing to a diagonal subsequence, we can assume that the σ ′ i converge to some component σ ′ ofτ. By 2–incompressibility , the surfacesAi are annuli. Note that there are two relative isotopy classes of such annuli. By passing to a further d iagonal subsequence, we can assume Ai andAi+1 are isotopic in Z\Γ by an isotopy which restricts to a very small isotopy of σi∪ σ ′ i toσi+1∪ σ ′ i+1 in∂Z . W e have shown that for any smallǫ and any sequenceSti, there is an arbitrarily large index i and inﬁnitely many indices j withi < jso that the surfaces Sti and Stj are isotopic, and the isotopy can be chosen to have the follow ing properties: (1) The isotopy takes Nǫ(Γ)∩ Sti to Nǫ(Γ)∩ Stj by an isotopy supported in Nǫ(Γ). (2) Outside Nǫ(Γ), the tracks of the isotopy are contained in ﬁbers of the exponentiated normal bundle of T ′\Nǫ(Γ). Choose a sequence ǫi→ 0, and pick a subsequence of the Sti’s and relabel so that Sti,S ti+1 satisfy the properties above with respect toNǫi(Γ). Then the composition of this inﬁnite sequence of isotopies is F . □ Remark 1.26. The reason for the circumlocutions in the statement of Lemma 1.25 is that we have not yet proved that T is a limit of the St as maps fromS toM . This will follow in §1.6, where we analyze the structure of T near a point p∈ Γ, and show it has a well–deﬁned tangent cone. 1.6. Existence of tangent cone. W e have constructedT as a subset ofM , and have observed that away from Γ,T is a minimal surface for the hyperbolic metric. W e refer to the intersection T∩ Γ as the coincidence set. In general, one cannot expect T to be smooth along the coincidence set. However, we show that it does have a well-deﬁned tangent cone in the sense of Gromov , and this tangent cone is in fact of