is a mapped SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 51 surface (resp. R is a properly mapped surface in N whose ends exit the cusps), then a P -essential annulus forR is annulus (resp. half open annulus) A with one component mapped to an essential simple curve of R which cannot be homotoped within R into ∂R (resp. an end of R) and another component (resp. the end of A) mapped into P (resp. properly mapped into a cusp). Let C0 be a 3-manifold relative core ofN0. Using [Mc] we can assume thatC0 is of the formH0∪ 1-handles where P0 = C0∩ P = H0∩ P is a core of P consisting of annuli and tori and H0 is a compact 3-manifold with incompressible frontier. Furt hermore δH0 has noP -essential annuli disjoint from int (H0). Deﬁne δEC0 to be the component of δC0 which facesE and δEH0 to be the components of δH0 which faceE. Deﬁne M to be the closure of the component of N0 split along δEH0 which containsE. Deﬁne ∂pM = P∩ M and ∂hM = δEH0. W e call M a relative end-manifold . By construction ∂hM has no P -essential annuli lying in M . By slightly thickening ∂hM and retaining the 1-handles of C0∩ M we obtain a core C of M . If W is a codimension-0 submanifold of M , then∂pW (resp.∂hW ) denotesW∩ ∂pM (resp. W∩ ∂hM ). By passing to the π1(M ) cover ofN we reduce to the case that in :M→ N0 is a homotopy equivalence; furthermore, for each component R of∂hM , the inclusion ofR into the corresponding component of N0\int(M ) is a homotopy equivalence. By passing to a subsequence we can assume that ∆ = {δi} is a collection of geodesics escapingE and is weakly 1000-separating. As in Lemma 5.5 [Ca] we slightly perturb the hyperbolic metric in the 1-neighborhood of ∆ to a metric µ such that for each i,δi isǫ-homotopic to a simple geodesic γi andµ has pinched negative curvature in (− 1. 01,−. 99) and is 1. 01-bilipshitz equivalent to the hyperbolic metric. Let Γ be the resulting collection of simple closed curves. Lemma 7.10. Let M be a relative end-manifold in the complete hyperbolic 3–manifold N . Given a sequence Γ of homotopically essential closed curves we can pass to an in ﬁnite subsequence also called Γ which is the disjoint union γ1∪ γ2∪ γ3∪··· where γ1 has ﬁnitely many components and the other γi’s have one component. If Γi denotes∪ i j=1γj, then there exists a manifoldW open inM , exhausted by a sequence of compact manifolds {Wi} with the following properties, (1)W isπ1 andH1 injective (in Z and Z/ 2Z coeﬁcients) inM and henceN . (2) For all i,∂ hW1 = ∂hWi and is a union of components of ∂hM . At most one component of ∂pW1 can lie in a component of ∂pM . For all i,∂ pWi is a union of essential annuli, each of which contains a component of ∂pW1. The frontier δWi is connected, separates Γi fromE and is 2-incompressible rel Γi. (3) There exists a compact submanifold core F⊂ W1 ofW such that each Γi can be homotoped intoF via a homotopy supported inWi.F is of the form (W1∩∂M )×I with 1-handles attached to the 1-side. Finally |χ (δF )|≤| χ (δC)|. Proof. Except for the last inequality , this lemma is just the relative form of that part of Theorem 5.21 which was used to prove Theorem 0.9. Let J be a connected compact set and V1⊂ V2⊂ V3··· an exhaustion of M such that ∂hM⊂ ∂V 1 and the ∂pVi are the tori ofM and essential annuli which meet each annular component of ∂pM in exactly one component. Deﬁne the relative end reductionWJ ofJ to be the 52 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI manifold exhausted by submanifolds {Wi} whereVi passes to Wi via the operations of compression, 2-handle addition, deletion and isot opy , where the compressions and 2-handle additions are done only to δVi and its successors. The same arguments as before show that WJ is both π1 andH1-injective and as before we can deﬁne relative notions of end non separable and end-engu lﬁng respectively for ﬁnite and locally ﬁnite inﬁnite collections of homotopy essential pairwise disjoint closed curves. Similarly , since W is a relative end manifold its core can be taken to be of the form stated in 3. The last inequality is the r elative version of inequality (∗) from the proof of Theorem 0.9. □ W e now show that each Wi is an atoroidal Haken manifold with negative Euler characteristic by showing that every embedded torus inc ompressible in Wi is boundary parallel and some component of∂W i is not a 2-sphere. If T is an embedded torus inN , then eitherT cuts off a rank-2 cusp orT is compressible. Therefore, if each component of∂W i is a torus incompressible inN , thenN has ﬁnite volume and Theorem 7.7 holds. The proof of the Claim of §6 shows that no component of ∂W is a torus compressible in N . Therefore, some component of ∂W i has genus ≥ 2. Since tori incompressible in N cut off rank-2 cusps, any nonboundary parallel torus T in Wi must be compressible in N . T o show that T is compressible inWi, it sufﬁces to show that it is compressible in W P i the parabolic extension of Wi inN . Now ∂W P i is a ﬁnite union of properly embedded surfaces in N which are incompressible in N\Γi andN has pinched negative sectional curvature. The proof of the Claim now applies to show that every embedded tor us in W P i which is compressible in N is also compressible in W P i . Lemma 7.11. If (E,∂E )⊂ (N0,P ) is a compact Γ-minimal surface (possibly non embedded), thenE cannot be homotoped rel ∂E intoP . Supposef : R→ N is a properly mapped Γ-minimal surface such that for each ǫ > 0, f − 1(N ǫ 0) is compact andR has noP -essential annuli disjoint from Γ. Iff is transverse to N ǫ 0, then each component of R\int(f − 1(N ǫ 0)) is either a compact disc or a half open annulus. Proof. If such a homotopy exists, then the lift ˜E ofE to H3 has the property that there exists a closed horoball H with∂ ˜E⊂ int(H) andE∩ ∂H̸=∅. This violates the maximum principle. Therefore if σ is a component of f − 1(P ) which bounds a disc D in R, then f (D)∩ N0⊂ P . If σ is essential in R, then σ can be homotoped into an end of R, since there are no P -essential annuli for R disjoint from Γ. Again the maximum principle implies that the entire annular region bounded by σ is mapped into a component ofN\int(N0). □ If W ⊂ N is a codimension 0 submanifold, we say that W has standardly embedded cusps if the restriction of W to each Margulis tube neighborhood of a cusp ofN is either the entire cusp, or is a ﬁnite union of