takes a point x to y where d(x,y ) < l/ 4 and hence for i sufﬁciently large there are essential closed curves of leng th< l/ 4 passing within 2d(x,A ) fromγi. □ Question 3.5. What is the maximal lower bound for the asymptotic tube radiu s of a geometrically inﬁnite end E of a complete, orientable, hyperbolic manifold with ﬁnitel y generated fundamental group, both in the cases that E is parabolic free or not? Question 3.6. What is the upper bound for asymptotic length of a geometrica lly inﬁnite endE? It follows from Theorem 0.9 that there is an upper bound whic h is a function of rank(π1(E)). 4. C ANARY ’ S THEOREM In this section we give a proof of Canary’s theorem (Theorem 4 .1) when N is parabolic free. Our proof of Theorem 0.9 will closely parall el this argument. Theorem 4.1 (Canary). IfE is a topologically tame end of the complete, orientable, hyperbolic 3-manifold N = H3/ Γ, where Γ has no parabolic elements, then either E is geometrically ﬁnite or there exists a sequence of CAT (− 1) surfaces exiting the end. If E is parametrized byS× [0,∞ ), then these surfaces are homotopic to surfaces of the form S× t, via a homotopy supported in S× [0,∞ ). Proof. It sufﬁces to consider the case that E is geometrically inﬁnite. By Proposition 3.2 there exists a sequence of pairwise disjoint η-separated simple closed geodesics ∆ = {δi} exitingE. Assume that ∆ and the parametrization of E are chosen so that for all i∈ N, δ i⊂ S× (i− 1,i ). Let g=genus(S), ∆i ={δ1,···,δ i} and let{α i} be a locally ﬁnite collection of embedded proper rays in E such that ∂α i∈ δi. An idea used repeatedly , in various guises, throughout this paper is the following. If R is a closed oriented surface and T is obtained by shrinkwrapping R rel the geodesics ∆R, then R is homotopic to T via a homotopy which does not meet ∆R, except possibly at the last instant. Therefore, if δi ⊂ ∆R and⟨R,α i⟩ = 1 , 30 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI thenT∩ α i̸=∅ and if T∩ δi =∅, then⟨T,α i⟩ = 1 . Here ⟨·,·⟩denotes algebraic intersection number. Warm up Case. EachS× i is 2-incompressible in N\∆. (E.g. N =S× R) Proof. Apply Theorem 0.8 to shrinkwrap S× i rel. ∆i+1 to a CAT (− 1) surface Si. Since⟨S× i,α i⟩ = 1 ,Si∩ α i̸=∅. Since{α i} is locally ﬁnite, the Bounded Diameter Lemma implies that the Si’s must exit E. Therefore for i sufﬁciently large Si⊂E and⟨Si,α 1⟩ = 1 ; and hence the projection of Si intoS× 0, (given by the product structure on E) is a degree-1 map between surfaces of the same genus. Since such maps are homotopic to homeomorphisms, we see that Si can be homotoped withinE to a homeomorphism onto S× 0. See Figure 4 for a schematic view . □ N N E E S × 0 S × 1 S × 2 S × n S1 S2 Sn Q: how can one ﬁnd an exiting sequence of CAT (−1) surfaces? A: shrinkwrap! FIGURE 4. A schematic depiction of shrinkwrapping in action General Case. (E.g.N is an open handlebody .) Proof. Without loss of generality we can assume that every closed or ientable surface separates N , (see Lemma 5.1 and Lemma 5.6). W e use a purely combinatorial/topological argument to ﬁnd a particular sequence of s mooth surfaces exiting E. W e then shrinkwrap these surfaces and show that they have th e desired escaping and homological properties. Fixi. If possible, compress S× i, via a compression which either misses ∆ or crosses ∆ once say atδi1⊂ ∆i. If possible, compress again via a compression meeting ∆\δi1 at most once say atδi2⊂ ∆i. After at mostn≤ 2g− 2 such operations and deleting 2-spheres we obtain embedded connected surfaces Si 1,···,S i ir , none of which is a 2–sphere and each of which is 2–incompressible rel ∆i+1\{δi1∪···∪δin}. For each ﬁxed i, eachδj (j≤ i) with at most 2g− 2 exceptions is separated fromE by exactly one surface Si k. Call Bagi k the region separated fromE bySi k. Note that all compressions in the passage of Si to{Si 1,···,S i ir} are on the nonE-side. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 31 Since each ir ≤ g, we can ﬁnd a p ∈ N and for each i, a reordering of the Si j’s (and their bags) so that for inﬁnitely many i≥ p,δp∈ Bagi 1; furthermore, if for each i such that δp ∈ Bagi 1, we denote by p(i) the maximal index such that δp(i) ∈ Bagi 1, then the set {p(i)} is unbounded. By Theorem 0.8, Si 1 is homotopic rel ∆i+1\{δi1,···,δ in} to a CAT (− 1) surfaceSi. Since the collection {α p(i)} is inﬁnite and locally ﬁnite, the Bounded Diameter Lemma imp lies that a subsequence of these Si 1’s must exit E. Call this subsequence T1,T 2,···, whereTi is the shrinkwrappedSni 1 . Therefore, fori sufﬁciently large,Ti must lie inS× (p,∞ ) and ⟨Ti,α p⟩ =⟨Sni 1 ,α p,⟩ = 1 . Therefore, projection of Ti toS× p is degree 1. This in turn implies that genus Ti =g andTi can be homotoped withinE to a homeomorphism ontoS× 0. See Figure 5 for another schematic view . □ Remark 4.2. This argument shows that for i sufﬁciently large,S× i is already 2– incompressible inN\∆i. Also, given anyη-separated collection of exiting geodesics a sufﬁciently large ﬁnite subset is 2-disc busting. Actuall y using the technology of the last chapter, this statement holds for any sequence of ex iting closed geodesics. The proof of Theorem 0.9 follows a similar strategy . Here is t he outline in the case thatN has a single endE and no parabolics. Given a sequence of η-separated exiting simple closed geodesics ∆ = {δi} we pass to subsequence (and possibly choose δ1 to have ﬁnitely many components) and ﬁnd a sequence of connec ted embedded surfaces denoted{∂W i} such that for each i, ∂W i separates ∆i =δ1∪ δ2∪···∪ δi from ∆− ∆i and is 2-incompressible rel ∆i. It is a priori possible that the∂W i’s do not exit E. If Wi denotes the compact region split off by ∂W i, then after possibly deleting an initial ﬁnite set of Wi’s (and adding the associated δi’s to δ1) we ﬁnd a compact 3-manifold D⊂ W1 which is a core forW =∪Wi. W e next ﬁnd an immersed genus≤ g surfaceTi, which homologically separates off a subset Bi of ∆i fromE. For inﬁnitely many i,Bi includes a ﬁxed δp and for thesei’s the set {p(i)} is unbounded, where p(i) is the largest index of a δk⊂ Bi. The surface Ti separatesBi from the rest in the sense that Ti lifts to an embedded surface ˆTi in the π1(D)-cover ˆWi of Wi and in that cover ˆTi separates a lift ˆBi from∂ ˆWi, the preimage of ∂W i. The argument to this point is purely topological and applies to any 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundam ental group. In the general case,{∂W