retraction described above. The disk sD′ i converge to the componentD⊂ T ′ bounded by τ, and the hyperbolic areas of the D′ i converge to the hyperbolic area of D. Note that B as above is really shorthand for Bt, since it depends on a choice of t. Similarly we have τt andDt. Since the component Dt⊂ T ′ bounded by τt is contained inBt for allt, the component D⊂ T ′ bounded byτ⊂ ∂N s is contained 16 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI inNs, since Bt→ Ns ast→ 1. So we can, and do, work with Ns(p) instead of B in the sequel. Now , letD′ be the cone on τ to the point p. D′ can be perturbed an arbitrarily small amount to an embedded disk D′′, and therefore by comparing D′′with the D′ i, we see that the hyperbolic area ofD′ must be at least as large as that ofD. Note that this perturbation can be taken to move D′ off Γ, and can be approximated by perturbations which miss Γ. Similar facts are true for all the perturbations we consider in the sequel. Since this is true for each componentτ ofTs, by abuse of notation we can replace T by the component of T∩ Ns(p) bounded by a single mapped in circle τ. This will be the local “branch” of the topologically immersed sur face T . W e use this notational convention for the remainder of the proof of the l emma. Note that the inequality above still holds. It follows that we must have area(T∩ Ns(p))≤ ∫ s 0 length(Ts) sinh(t) sinh(s)dt = area(cone onTs) Now , for each sphere∂N s(p), we letφ be the projection, along hyperbolic geodesics, to the unit sphere S2 in the tangent space at p. For each t∈ (0, 1], deﬁne ∥Tt∥ = length(φ(Tt)) = length(Tt) sinh(t) It follows from the inequalities above that for some interme diate s′ we must have ∥Ts′∥≤∥ Ts∥ with equality iff T∩ Ns(p) is equal to the cone on Ts. Now , the cone onTs is not locally least area for the hyperbolic metric inNs(p)\Γ unlessTs is a great circle or geodesic bigon in ∂N s(p) (with endpoints on∂N s(p)∩ Γ), in which case the lemma is proved. T o see this, just observe that a cone has vanishing principal curvature in the radial direction, so its m ean curvature vanishes iff it is totally geodesic away from Γ. So we may suppose that for any s there is some s′< ssuch that∥Ts′∥ <∥Ts∥. Therefore we choose a sequence of valuessi withsi→ 0 such that∥Tsi∥>∥Tsi+1∥, such that∥Tsi∥ converges to the inﬁmal value of∥Tt∥ witht∈ (0,s ], and such that ∥Tsi∥ is the minimal value of∥Tt∥ on the intervalt∈ [si, 1]. Note that for any small t, the cone on Tt has area area(cone onTt) = t 2 length(Tt) +O(t3) = t2 2∥Tt∥ +O(t3) The set of loops in the sphere with length bounded above by som e constant, parameterized by arclength, is compact, by the Arzela–Ascoli theorem, and so we can suppose that the φ(Tsi ) converge in the Hausdorff sense to a loop C⊂ S2. Claim. C is a geodesic bigon. Proof. W e suppose not, and will obtain a contradiction. W e ﬁx notation: for each i, let Ci denote the inverse image φ − 1(C) under φ : ∂N si(p)→ S2. So Ci is a curve in ∂N si(p). By the cone on Ci we mean the union of the hyperbolic geodesic segments in Nsi(p) fromCi top. By the cone on C we mean the union of the geodesic segments in the unit ball in Euc lidean 3-space from SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 17 C⊂ S2 to the origin. For each i, we have an estimate area(cone onCi) = s2 i area(cone onC) +O(s3 i ) For eachi, letT i denote the surface obtained from T∩ Nsi(p) by rescaling metrically by 1/s i. Then T i is a surface with boundary contained in a ball of radius 1 in a space of constant curvature −s2 i . Moreover, it enjoys the same least area properties asT∩ Nsi (p). By the monotonicity property of the ∥Tsi∥ and the coarea formula, we have an inequality lim i→∞ area(T i)≥ area(cone onC) On the other hand, since each T i is least area, we have an estimate 1 2∥Tsi∥ +O(si) = area(cone onTsi) s2 i ≥ area(T i) It follows that the limit of the area of the T i is actually equal to the area of the cone onC. On the other hand, since the φ(Tsi ) converge to C, for sufﬁciently large i we can ﬁnd an immersed annulus Ai inS2 with area≤ κ for any positive κ, which is the track of a homotopy (in S2) from φ(Tsi ) to C. W e let φ − 1(Ai) denote the corresponding annulus in∂N si(p) W e can build a new immersed surface bounded byTsi which is the union of this annulusφ − 1(Ai) with the cone on Ci. This surface can be perturbed an arbitrarily small amount, away from Γ, to an embedded surface F i. After rescaling F i by 1/s i, we get a surface Gi with the same boundary as T i of area equal to area(Gi) = area( cone onC) +κ +O(si) SinceT i is locally least area, it follows that for any κ > 0, for sufﬁciently large i (depending onκ), area(cone onC) + 2κ≥ area(Gi)≥ area(T i)≥ area(cone onC)− κ The surfaceF i contains a subsurface which is the cone on Ci. Since by hypothesis, C is not a geodesic bigon, the cone on C can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to a surface whose area is smaller th an that of the cone onC by some deﬁnite amount ǫ. Similarly , the cone on Ci can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to a surface whose area is smaller than the cone onCi byǫ(si)2 whereǫ is independent of i. After rescaling by 1/s i, It follows that Gi can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to H i with the same boundary asGi andT i, for which area(H i)≤ area(Gi)− ǫ whereǫ is independent ofi. Since κ may be chosen as small as we like, we choose 3κ<ǫ . Then for sufﬁciently large i we get area(H i)< area(T i) which contradicts the least area property of T i. This contradiction shows that C is actually a geodesic bigon, and completes the proof of the cla im. □ 18 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI W e now complete the proof of Lemma 1.27. LetC⊂ S2 be this geodesic bigon. Then inside an ǫ neighborhood of C inS2, we can ﬁnd a pair of curves C± , whereC+ is convex, and C− is convex except for two acute angles on T Γ∩ S2. For each i, letC± i ⊂ ∂N si(p) be the inverse image of C± underφ. The cone on C± i is a pair of barrier surfaces in Ns(p). In particular, once φ(Tsi ) andφ(Tsi+1 ) are both trapped between C+ andC− , the same is true of φ(Ts′) for alls′∈ [si+1,s i].