arXiv:math/0407161v3  [math.GT]  22 Oct 2005
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE T AMING OF HYPERBOLIC
3–MANIFOLDS
DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
0. I NTRODUCTION
During the period 1960–1980, Ahlfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Ma skit, Sullivan,
Thurston and many others developed the theory of geometrically ﬁnite ends of hyperbolic 3–manifolds. It remained to understand those ends which are n ot geometrically ﬁnite; such ends are called geometrically inﬁnite.
Around 1978 William Thurston gave a conjectural descriptio n of geometrically
inﬁnite ends of complete hyperbolic 3–manifolds. An example of a geometrically
inﬁnite end is given by an inﬁnite cyclic covering space of a c losed hyperbolic 3manifold which ﬁbers over the circle. Such an end has cross se ctions of uniformly
bounded area. By contrast, the area of sections of geometric ally ﬁnite ends grow
exponentially in the distance from the convex core.
For the sake of clarity we will assume throughout this introd uction that N =
H3/ Γ where Γ is parabolic free. Precise statements of the parabolic case will be
given in§7.
Thurston’s idea was formalized by Bonahon [Bo] and Canary [C a] with the following.
Deﬁnition 0.1. An endE of a hyperbolic 3-manifold N is simply degenerate if it has
a closed neighborhood of the formS× [0,∞ ) whereS is a closed surface, and there
exists a sequence{Si} of CAT(− 1) surfaces exitingE which are homotopic toS× 0
inE. This means that there exists a sequence of maps fi : S→ N such that the
induced path metrics induce CAT (− 1) structures on the Si’s, f (Si)⊂ S× [i,∞ )
andf is homotopic to a homeomorphism onto S× 0 via a homotopy supported in
S× [0,∞ ).
Here by CAT (− 1), we mean as usual a geodesic metric space for which geodesic triangles are “thinner” than comparison triangles in hyperbolic space. If the
metrics pulled back by the fi are smooth, this is equivalent to the condition that
the Riemannian curvature is bounded above by− 1. See [BH] for a reference. Note
that by Gauss–Bonnet, the area of a CAT (− 1) surface can be estimated from its
Euler characteristic; it follows that a simply degenerate e nd has cross sections of
uniformly bounded area, just like the end of a cyclic cover of a manifold ﬁbering
over the circle.
Francis Bonahon [Bo] observed that geometrically inﬁnite ends are exactly those
ends possessing an exiting sequence of closed geodesics. Th is will be our working
deﬁnition of such ends throughout this paper.
partially supported by Therese Calegari and NSF grant DMS-0 405491.
partially supported by NSF grant DMS-0071852.
V ersion 1.00, October 22, 2005.
1
2 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
The following is our main result.
Theorem 0.2. An endE of a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold N with ﬁnitely generated
fundamental group is simply degenerate if there exists a seq uence of closed geodesics exitingE.
Consequently we have,
Theorem 0.3. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Then every end of N is geometrically tame, i.e. it is either geometrically
ﬁnite or simply degenerate.
In 1974 Marden [Ma] showed that a geometrically ﬁnite hyperb olic 3-manifold
is topologically tame, i.e. is the interior of a compact 3-manifold. He asked wheth er
all complete hyperbolic 3-manifolds with ﬁnitely generate d fundamental group
are topologically tame. This question is now known as the T ame Ends Conjectureor
Marden Conjecture.
Theorem 0.4. If N is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then N is topologically tame.
Ian Agol [Ag] has independently proven Theorem 0.4.
There have been many important steps towards Theorem 0.2. Th e seminal result was obtained by Thurston ([T], Theorem 9.2) who proved T heorems 0.3 and
0.4 for certain algebraic limits of quasi Fuchsian groups. B onahon [Bo] established Theorems 0.2 and 0.4 when π1(N ) is freely indecomposible and Canary
[Ca] proved that topological tameness implies geometrical tameness. Results in
the direction of 0.4 were also obtained by Canary-Minsky [Ca M], Kleineidam–
Souto [KS], Evans [Ev], Brock–Bromberg–Evans–Souto [BBES ], Ohshika, Brock–
Souto [BS] and Souto [So].
Thurston ﬁrst discovered how to obtain analytic conclusion s from the existence
of exiting sequences of CAT (− 1) surfaces. Thurston’s work as generalized by
Bonahon [Bo] and Canary [Ca] combined with Theorem 0.2 yield s a positive proof
of the Ahlfors’ Measure Conjecture [A2].
Theorem 0.5. If Γ is a ﬁnitely generated Kleinian group, then the limit set LΓ is either
S2
∞ or has Lebesgue measure zero. If LΓ =S2
∞ , then Γ acts ergodically on S2
∞ .
Theorem 0.5 is one of the many analytical consequences of our main result.
Indeed Theorem 0.2 implies that a complete hyperbolic 3-man ifoldN with ﬁnitely
generated fundamental group is analytically tame as deﬁned by Canary [Ca]. It
follows from Canary that the various results of §9 [Ca] hold for N .
Our main result is the last step needed to prove the following monumental
result, the other parts being established by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Maskit,
Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky, Brock–Canary–Minsky ,
Ohshika, Kleineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire–Ohshik a, Hossein–Souto and
Rees. See [Mi] and [BCM].
Theorem 0.6 (Classiﬁcation Theorem). IfN is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with
ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then N is determined up to isometry by its topological type, the conformal boundary of its geometrically ﬁnit e ends and the ending laminations of its geometrically inﬁnite ends.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 3
The following result was conjectured by Bers, Sullivan and T hurston. Theorem
0.4 is one of many results, many of them recent, needed to buil d a proof. Major
contributions were made by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Mask it, Mostow , Prasad,
Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky , Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kleineidam–
Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire–Ohshika, Hossein–Souto, Rees, Bromberg and Brock–
Bromberg.
Theorem 0.7 (Density Theorem) . If N = H3/ Γ is a complete ﬁnitely generated 3manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then Γ is the algebraic limit of geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian groups.
The main technical innovation of this paper is a new technique called shrinkwrapping for producing CAT(− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Historically , such
surfaces have been immensely important in the study of hyper bolic 3-manifolds,
e.g. see [T], [Bo], [Ca] and [CaM].
Given a locally ﬁnite set ∆ of pairwise disjoint simple closed curves in the 3manifoldN , we say that the embedded surface S⊂ N is 2-incompressible rel. ∆ if
every compressing disc for S meets ∆ at least twice. Here is a sample theorem.
Theorem 0.8 (Existence of shrinkwrapped surface) . LetM be a complete, orientable,
parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in M . Further, let S⊂ M\Γ be a closed embedded 2–incompressible
surface rel. Γ which is either nonseparating in M or separates some component of Γ from
another. ThenS is homotopic to a CAT (− 1) surfaceT via a homotopy
F :S× [0, 1]→ M
such that
(1) F (S× 0) = S
(2) F (S× t) = St is an embedding disjoint from Γ for 0≤ t< 1
(3) F (S× 1) = T
(4) IfT ′ is any other surface with these properties, then area (T )≤ area(T ′)
We say that T is obtained from S by shrinkwrapping rel. Γ, or if Γ is understood, T is
obtained fromS by shrinkwrapping.
In fact, we prove the stronger result that T is Γ–minimal (to be deﬁned in §1)
which implies in particular that it is intrinsically CAT (− 1)
Here is the main technical result of this paper.
Theorem 0.9. LetE be an end of the complete orientable hyperbolic 3-manifold N with
ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Let C be a 3-dimensional compact core of N ,∂EC
the component of ∂C facingE andg = genus(∂EC). If there exists a sequence of closed
geodesics exitingE, then there exists a sequence{Si} of CAT(− 1) surfaces of genusg exitingE such that each{Si} is homologically separating inE. That is, each Si homologically
separates∂EC fromE.
Theorem 0.4 can now be deduced from Theorem 0.9 and Souto [So] ; however,
we prove that Theorem 0.9 implies Theorem 0.4 using only 3-ma nifold topology
and elementary hyperbolic geometry .
The proof of Theorem 0.9 blends elementary aspects of minima l surface theory ,
hyperbolic geometry , and 3-manifold topology . The method will be demonstrated
4 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
in§4 where we give a proof of Canary’s theorem. The ﬁrst time read er is urged to
begin with that section.
This paper is organized as follows. In §1 and§2 we establish the shrinkwrapping technique for ﬁnding CAT (− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In §3 we
prove the existence of ǫ-separated simple geodesics exiting the end of parabolic
free manifolds. In§4 we prove Canary’s theorem. This proof will model the proof
of the general case. The general strategy will be outlined at the end of that section.
In§5 we develop the topological theory of end reductions in 3-ma nifolds. In§6 we
give the proofs of our main results. In §7 we give the necessary embellishments of
our methods to state and prove our results in the case of manif olds with parabolic
cusps.
Notation 0.10. IfX⊂ Y , then N (X) denotes a regular neighborhood of X inY
and int(X) denotes the interior of X. If X is a topological space, then|X|denotes
the number of components ofX. IfA,B are topological subspaces of a third space,
thenA\B denotes the intersection of A with the complement of B.
Acknowledgements 0.11. The ﬁrst author is grateful to Nick Makarov for some
useful analytic discussions. The second author is grateful to Michael Freedman for
many long conversations in Fall 1996 which introduced him to the T ame Ends conjecture. He thanks Francis Bonahon, Y air Minsky and Jeff Bro ck for their interest
and helpful comments. Part of this research was carried out w hile he was visiting
Nara W omen’s University , the T echnion and the Institute forAdvanced Study . He
thanks them for their hospitality . W e thank the referees for their many thoughtful
suggestions and comments.
1. S HRINKWRAPPING
In this section, we introduce a new technical tool for ﬁnding CAT(− 1) surfaces
in hyperbolic 3–manifolds, called shrinkwrapping. Roughly speaking, given a collection of simple closed geodesics Γ in a hyperbolic 3–manifoldM and an embedded surface S⊂ M\Γ, a surface T ⊂ M is obtained from S by shrinkwrappingS
rel. Γ if it homotopic to S, can be approximated by an isotopy from S supported
inM\Γ, and is least area subject to these constraints.
Given mild topological conditions on M, Γ,S (namely 2–incompressibility , to
be deﬁned below) the shrinkwrapped surface exists, and is CA T(− 1) with respect
to the path metric induced by the Riemannian metric on M .
W e use some basic analytical tools throughout this section,including the Gauss–
Bonnet formula, the coarea formula, and the Arzela–Ascoli t heorem. At a number
of points we must invoke results from the literature to estab lish existence of minimal surfaces ([MSY]), existence of limits with area and cur vature control ([CiSc]),
and regularity of the shrinkwrapped surfaces along Γ ([Ri],[Fre]). General references are [CM], [Js] [Fed] and [B].
1.1. Geometry of surfaces. For convenience, we state some elementary but fundamental lemmas concerning curvature of (smooth) surfaces in Riemannian 3manifolds.
W e use the following standard terms to refer to different kin ds of minimal surfaces:
Deﬁnition 1.1. A smooth surface Σ in a Riemannian 3-manifold is minimal if it is
a critical point for area with respect to all smooth compactl y supported variations.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 5
It is locally least area (also called stable) if it is a local minimum for area with respect
to all smooth, compactly supported variations. A closed, em bedded surface is
globally least area if it is an absolute minimum for area amongst all smooth surfa ces
in its isotopy class.
Note that we do not require that our minimal or locally least a rea surfaces are
complete.
Any subsurface of a globally least area surface is locally le ast area, and a locally
least area surface is minimal. A smooth surface is minimal if f its mean curvature
vector ﬁeld vanishes identically . For more details, consult [CM], especially chapter
5.
The intrinsic curvature of a minimal surface is controlled b y the geometry of
the ambient manifold. The following lemma is formula 5.6 on p age 100 of [CM].
Lemma 1.2 (Monotonicity of curvature) . Let Σ be a minimal surface in a Riemannian
manifoldM . Let KΣ denote the curvature of Σ, and KM the sectional curvature of M .
Then restricted to the tangent space T Σ,
KΣ =KM− 1
2|A|2
whereA denotes the second fundamental form of Σ.
In particular, if the Riemannian curvature onM is bounded from above by some
constantK, then the curvature of a minimal surface Σ inM is also bounded above
byK.
The following lemma is just the usual Gauss–Bonnet formula:
Lemma 1.3 (Gauss–Bonnet formula). Let Σ be aC3 Riemannian surface with (possibly
empty)C3 boundary ∂Σ. Let KΣ denote the Gauss curvature of Σ, and κ the geodesic
curvature along∂Σ. Then ∫
Σ
KΣ = 2πχ (Σ)−
∫
∂ Σ
κdl
Many simple proofs exist in the literature. For example, see [Js].
If∂Σ is merely piecewise C3, with ﬁnitely many corners pi and external angles
α i, the Gauss–Bonnet formula must be modiﬁed as follows:
Lemma 1.4 (Gauss–Bonnet with corners) . Let Σ be a C3 Riemannian surface with
boundary∂Σ which is piecewiseC3, and has external angles α i at ﬁnitely many pointspi.
LetKΣ andκ be as above. Then∫
Σ
KΣ = 2πχ (Σ)−
∫
∂ Σ
κdl−
∑
i
α i
Observe forabc a geodesic triangle with external anglesα 1,α 2,α 3 that Lemma 1.4
implies ∫
abc
K = 2π−
∑
i
α i
Notice that the geodesic curvature κ vanishes precisely when ∂Σ is a geodesic,
that is, a critical point for the length functional. More gen erally , letν be the normal
bundle of ∂Σ in Σ, oriented so that the inward unit normal is a positive sectio n.
The exponential map restricted to ν deﬁnes a map
φ :∂Σ× [0,ǫ ]→ Σ
6 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
for small ǫ, where φ(·, 0) = Id|∂ Σ, and φ(∂Σ,t ) for small t is the boundary in Σ of
the tubulart neighborhood of∂Σ. Then
∫
∂ Σ
κdl =− d
dt
⏐
⏐
⏐
t=0
length(φ t(∂Σ))
Note that if Σ is a surface with sectional curvature bounded above by − 1, then
by integrating this formula we see that the ball Bt(p) of radiust in Σ about a point
p∈ Σ satisﬁes
area(Bt(p))≥ 2π (cosh(t)− 1)>πt 2
for smallt> 0.
1.2. Comparison geometry . For basic elements of the theory of comparison geometry , see [BH].
Deﬁnition 1.5 (Comparison triangle) . Leta1a2a3 be a geodesic triangle in a geodesic metric space X. Let κ∈ R be given. A κ–comparison triangle is a geodesic
triangle
a1a2a3 in the complete simply–connected Riemannian 2–manifold of constant sectional curvature κ, where the edges aiaj andaiaj satisfy
length(aiaj) = length(aiaj)
Given a point x∈ a1a2 on one of the edges of a1a2a3, there is a corresponding
pointx∈ a1a2 on one of the edges of the comparison triangle, satisfying
length(a1x) = length(a1x)
and
length(xa2) = length(xa2)
Remark 1.6. Note that if κ > 0, the comparison triangle might not exist if the
edge lengths are too big, but if κ≤ 0 the comparison triangle always exists, and is
unique up to isometry .
There is a slight issue of terminology to be aware of here. In a surface, a triangle
is a polygonal disk with 3 geodesic edges. In a path metric space , a triangle is just a
union of 3 geodesic segments with common endpoints.
Deﬁnition 1.7 (CAT(κ)). Let S be a closed surface with a path metric g. Let ˜S
denote the universal cover of ˜S, with path metric induced by the pullback of the
path metric g. Let κ ∈ R be given. S is said to be CAT(κ) if for every geodesic
triangleabc in ˜S, and every point z on the edge bc, the distance in ˜S froma toz is
no more than the distance from a toz in aκ–comparison triangle.
By Lemma 1.4 applied to geodesic triangles, one can show that aC3 surface Σ
with sectional curvatureKΣ satisfyingKΣ≤ κ everywhere is CAT(κ) with respect
to the Riemannian path metric. This fact is essentially due t o Alexandrov; see [B]
for a proof.
More generally , suppose Σ is a surface which is C3 outside a closed, nowhere
dense subset X ⊂ Σ. Furthermore, suppose that KΣ ≤ κ holds in Σ\X, and
suppose that the formula from Lemma 1.4 holds for every geode sic triangle with
vertices in Σ\X (which is a dense set of geodesic triangles). Then the same ar gument shows that Σ is CAT(κ). See e.g. [Re] §8, pp. 135–140 for more details, and a
general discussion of metric surfaces with (integral) curv ature bounds.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 7
Deﬁnition 1.8 (Γ–minimal surfaces) . Let κ ∈ R be given. Let M be a complete
Riemannian 3–manifold with sectional curvature bounded above by κ, and let Γ
be an embedded collection of simple closed geodesics in M . An immersion
ψ :S→ M
is Γ–minimal if it is smooth with mean curvature 0 in M\Γ, and is metrically
CAT(κ) with respect to the path metric induced by ψ from the Riemannian metric
onM .
Notice by Lemma 1.2 that a smooth surface S with mean curvature 0 in M is
CAT(κ), so a minimal surface (in the usual sense) is an example of a Γ–minimal
surface.
1.3. Statement of shrinkwrapping theorem.
Deﬁnition 1.9 (2–incompressibility). An embedded surface S in a 3–manifoldM
disjoint from a collection Γ of simple closed curves is said to be 2–incompressible rel.
Γ if any essential compressing disk for S must intersect Γ in at least two points. If
Γ is understood, we say S is 2–incompressible.
Theorem 1.10 (Existence of shrinkwrapped surface). LetM be a complete, orientable,
parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in M . Further, let S⊂ M\Γ be a closed embedded 2–incompressible
surface rel. Γ which is either nonseparating in M or separates some component of Γ from
another. ThenS is homotopic to a Γ–minimal surfaceT via a homotopy
F :S× [0, 1]→ M
such that
(1) F (S× 0) = S
(2) F (S× t) = St is an embedding disjoint from Γ for 0≤ t< 1
(3) F (S× 1) = T
(4) IfT ′ is any other surface with these properties, then area (T )≤ area(T ′)
We say that T is obtained from S by shrinkwrapping rel. Γ, or if Γ is understood, T is
obtained fromS by shrinkwrapping.
The remainder of this section will be taken up with the proof o f Theorem 1.10.
Remark 1.11. In fact, for our applications, the property we want to use of o ur
surface T is that we can estimate its diameter (rel. the thin part of M ) from its
Euler characteristic. This follows from a Gauss–Bonnet est imate and the bounded
diameter lemma (Lemma 1.15, to be proved below). In fact, our argument will
show directly that the surface T satisﬁes Gauss–Bonnet; the fact that it is CAT (− 1)
is logically superﬂuous for the purposes of this paper.
1.4. Deforming metrics along geodesics.
Deﬁnition 1.12 (δ–separation). Let Γ be a collection of disjoint simple geodesics in
a Riemannian manifold M . The collection Γ isδ–separated if any path α : I→ M
with endpoints on Γ and satisfying
length(α (I))≤ δ
8 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
is homotopic rel. endpoints into Γ. The supremum of such δ is called the separation
constant of Γ. The collection Γ is weaklyδ–separated if
dist(γ,γ ′)>δ
wheneverγ,γ ′ are distinct components of Γ. The supremum of such δ is called the
weak separation constant of Γ.
Deﬁnition 1.13 (Neighborhood and tube neighborhood) . Letr >0 be given. For
a point x∈ M , we let Nr(x) denote the closed ball of radius r about x, and let
N<r(x),∂N r(x) denote respectively the interior and the boundary of Nr(x). For a
closed geodesic γ inM , we let Nr(γ) denote the closed tube of radius r aboutγ,
and letN<r(γ),∂N r(γ) denote respectively the interior and the boundary ofNr(γ).
If Γ denotes a union of geodesics γi, then we use the shorthand notation
Nr(Γ) =
⋃
γ i
Nr(γi)
Remark 1.14. T opologically ,∂N r(x) is a sphere and ∂N r(γ) is a torus, for sufﬁciently small r. Similarly ,Nr(x) is a closed ball, and Nr(γ) is a closed solid torus.
If Γ isδ–separated, thenNδ/ 2(Γ) is a union of solid tori.
Lemma 1.15 (Bounded Diameter Lemma). LetM be a complete hyperbolic 3–manifold.
Let Γ be a disjoint collection of δ–separated embedded geodesics. Let ǫ >0 be a Margulis
constant for dimension 3, and letM≤ ǫ denote the subset of M where the injectivity radius
is at most ǫ. If S⊂ M\Γ is a 2–incompressible Γ–minimal surface, then there is a constantC =C(χ (S),ǫ,δ )∈ R andn =n(χ (S),ǫ,δ )∈ Z such that for each component Si
ofS∩ (M\M≤ ǫ), we have
diam(Si)≤ C
Furthermore,S can only intersect at most n components ofM≤ ǫ.
Proof. Since S is 2–incompressible, any point x∈ S either lies in M≤ ǫ, or is the
center of an embedded m–disk inS, where
m = min(ǫ/ 2,δ/ 2)
Since S is CAT(− 1), Gauss–Bonnet implies that the area of an embedded m–
disk inS has area at least 2π (cosh(m)− 1)>πm 2.
This implies that if x∈ S∩ M\M≤ ǫ then
area(S∩ Nm(x))≥ πm 2
The proof now follows by a standard covering argument. □
A surfaceS satisfying the conclusion of the Bounded Diameter Lemma is s ometimes said to have diameter bounded by C moduloM≤ ǫ.
Remark 1.16. Note that if ǫ is a Margulis constant, then M≤ ǫ consists of Margulis
tubes and cusps. Note that the same argument shows that, away from the thin part
ofM and anǫ neighborhood of Γ, the diameter of S can be bounded by a constant
depending only on χ (S) andǫ.
The basic idea in the proof of Theorem 1.10 is to search for a le ast area representative of the isotopy class of the surface S, subject to the constraint that the
track of this isotopy does not cross Γ. Unfortunately ,M\Γ is not complete, so the
prospects for doing minimal surface theory in this manifold are remote. T o remedy this, we deform the metric on M in a neighborhood of Γ in such a way that
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 9
we can guarantee the existence of a least area surface repres entative with respect
to the deformed metric, and then take a limit of such surfaces under a sequence
of smaller and smaller such metric deformations. W e describe the deformations of
interest below .
In fact, for technical reasons which will become apparent in §1.8, the deformations described below are not quite adequate for our purpo ses, and we must
consider metrics which are deformed twice — ﬁrstly , a mild deformation which
satisﬁes curvature pinching − 1 ≤ K ≤ 0, and which is totally Euclidean in a
neighborhood of Γ, and secondly a deformation analogous to the kind described
below in Deﬁnition 1.17, which is supported in this totally E uclidean neighborhood. Since the reason for this “double perturbation” will n ot be apparent until
§1.8, we postpone discussion of such deformations until that time.
Deﬁnition 1.17 (Deforming metrics) . Let δ > 0 be such that Γ is δ–separated.
Choose some smallr withr<δ/ 2. Fort∈ [0, 1) we deﬁne a family of Riemannian
metricsgt onM in the following manner. The metrics gt agree with the hyperbolic
metric away from some ﬁxed tubular neighborhood Nr(Γ).
Let
h :Nr(1− t)(Γ)→ [0,r (1− t)]
be the function whose value at a point p is the hyperbolic distance from p to
Γ. W e deﬁne a metric gt on M which agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside
Nr(1− t)(Γ), and on Nr(1− t)(Γ) is conformally equivalent to the hyperbolic metric,
as follows. Let φ : [0, 1]→ [0, 1] be a C∞ bump function, which is equal to 1 on
the interval [1/ 3, 2/ 3], which is equal to 0 on the intervals [0, 1/ 4] and [3/ 4, 1], and
which is strictly increasing on [1/ 4, 1/ 3] and strictly decreasing on [2/ 3, 3/ 4]. Then
deﬁne the ratio
gt length element
hyperbolic length element = 1 + 2φ
(
h(p)
r(1− t)
)
W e are really only interested in the behaviour of the metrics gt as t→ 1. As
such, the choice of r is irrelevant. However, for convenience, we will ﬁx some
smallr throughout the remainder of§1.
The deformed metrics gt have the following properties:
Lemma 1.18 (Metric properties). Thegt metric satisﬁes the following properties:
(1) For each t there is an f (t) satisfyingr(1− t)/ 4<f (t)< 3r(1− t)/ 4 such that
the union of tori ∂N f (t)(Γ) are totally geodesic for the gt metric
(2) For each component γi and each t, the metric gt restricted to Nr(γi) admits a
family of isometries which preserve γi and acts transitively on the unit normal
bundle (inM ) toγi
(3) The area of a disk cross–section on Nr(1− t) isO((1− t)2).
(4) The metric gt dominates the hyperbolic metric on 2–planes. That is, for all 2–
vectorsν, thegt area ofν is at least as large as the hyperbolic area of ν
Proof. Statement (2) follows from the fact that the deﬁnition of gt has the desired
symmetries. Statements (3) and (4) follow from the fact that the ratio of the gt
metric to the hyperbolic metric is pinched between 1 and 3. Now , a radially symmetric circle linking Γ of radius s has length 2π cosh(s) in the hyperbolic metric,
and therefore has length
2π cosh(s)(1 + 2φ(s/r (1− t)))
10 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
in the gt metric. For sufﬁciently small (but ﬁxed) r, this function of s has a local
minimum on the interval [r(1− t)/ 4, 3r(1− t)/ 4]. It follows that the family of
radially symmetric tori linking a component of Γ has a local minimum for area in
the interval [r(1− t)/ 4, 3r(1− t)/ 4]. By property (2), such a torus must be totally
geodesic for the gt metric. □
Notation 1.19. W e denote length of an arcα :I→ M with respect to the gt metric
as lengtht(α (I)), and area of a surface ψ :R→ M with respect to the gt metric as
areat(ψ (R)).
1.5. Constructing the homotopy . As a ﬁrst approximation, we wish to construct
surfaces in M\Γ which are globally least area with respect to the gt metric. There
are various tools for constructing least area surfaces in Ri emannian 3-manifolds
under various conditions, and subject to various constrain ts. Typically one works
in closed 3-manifolds, but if one wants to work in 3-manifolds with boundary , the
“correct” boundary condition to impose is mean convexity . A co-oriented surface
in a Riemannian 3-manifold is said to be mean convex if the mean curvature vector of the surface always points to the negative side of the su rface, where it does
not vanish. T otally geodesic surfaces and other minimal sur faces are examples of
mean convex surfaces, with respect to any co-orientation. S uch surfaces act as barriers for minimal surfaces, in the following sense: suppose thatS1 is a mean convex
surface, and S2 is a minimal surface. Suppose further that S2 is on the negative
side of S1. Then if S2 andS1 are tangent, they are equal. One should stress that
this barrier property is local. See [MSY] for a more thorough discussion of barrier
surfaces.
Lemma 1.20 (Minimal surface exists) . Let M, Γ,S be as in the statement of Theorem 1.10. Let f (t) be as in Lemma 1.18, so that ∂N f (t)(Γ) is totally geodesic with respect to the gt metric. Then for each t, there exists an embedded surface St isotopic in
M\Nf (t)(Γ) toS, and which is globally gt–least area among all such surfaces.
Proof. Note that with respect to the gt metrics, the surfaces ∂N f (t)(Γ) described in
Lemma 1.18 are totally geodesic, and therefore act as barrie r surfaces. W e remove
the tubular neighborhoods of Γ bounded by these totally geodesic surfaces, and
denote the result M\Nf (t)(Γ) byM ′ throughout the remainder of this proof. W e
assume, after a small isotopy if necessary , that S does not intersect Nf (t) for any
t, and therefore we can (and do) think of S as a surface in M ′. Notice that M ′ is a
complete Riemannian manifold with totally geodesic bounda ry . W e will construct
the surfaceSt inM ′, in the same isotopy class as S (also inM ′).
If there exists a lower bound on the injectivity radius in M ′ with respect to the
gt metric, then the main theorem of [MSY] implies that either su ch a globally least
area surface St can be found, or S is the boundary of a twisted I–bundle over a
closed surface in M ′, or else S can be homotoped off every compact set in M ′.
First we show that these last two possibilities cannot occur. IfS is nonseparating
inM , then it intersects some essential loop β with algebraic intersection number
1. It follows that S cannot be homotoped off β , and does not bound an I–bundle.
Similarly , ifγ1,γ 2 are distinct geodesics of Γ separated from each other by S, then
theγi’s can be joined by an arc α which has algebraic intersection number 1 with
the surface S. The same is true of any S′ homotopic to S; it follows that S cannot
be homotoped off the arc α , nor does it bound an I–bundle disjoint from Γ, and
therefore does not bound an I–bundle inM ′.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 11
Now suppose that the injectivity radius on M ′ is not bounded below . W e use
the following trick. Let g′
t be obtained from the metric gt by perturbing it on the
complement of some enormous compact regionE so that it has a ﬂaring end there,
and such that there is a barrierg′
t-minimal surface close to∂E , separating the complement ofE inM ′ fromS. Then by [MSY] there is a globally g′
t least area surface
S′
t, contained in the compact subset of M ′ bounded by this barrier surface. Since
S′
t must either intersect β orα , by the Bounded Diameter Lemma 1.15, unless the
hyperbolic area of S′
t∩ E is very large, the diameter of S′
t in E is much smaller
than the distance from α orβ to∂E . Since by hypothesis, S′
t is least area for the g′
t
metric, its restriction to E has hyperbolic area less than the hyperbolic area of S,
and therefore there is an a priori upper bound on its diameter in E. By choosing E
big enough, we see that S′
t is contained in the interior of E, wheregt andg′
t agree.
ThusS′
t is globally least area for the gt metric in M ′, and therefore St = S′
t exists
for anyt. □
The bounded diameter lemma easily implies the following:
Lemma 1.21 (Compact set). There is a ﬁxed compact set E⊂ M such that the surfaces
St constructed in Lemma 1.20 are all contained in E.
Proof. Since the hyperbolic areas of the St are all uniformly bounded (by e.g.
the hyperbolic area of S) and are 2–incompressible rel. Γ, they have uniformly
bounded diameter away from Γ outside of Margulis tubes. Since for homological
reasons they must intersect the compact sets α or β , they can intersect at most
ﬁnitely many Margulis tubes. It follows that they are all con tained in a ﬁxed
bounded neighborhoodE ofα orβ , containing Γ. □
T o extract good limits of sequences of minimal surfaces, one generally needs
a priori bounds on the area and the total curvature of the limiting sur faces. Here
for a surface S, the total curvature ofS is just the integral of the absolute value of
the (Gauss) curvature over S. For minimal surfaces of a ﬁxed topological type in
a manifold with sectional curvature bounded above, a curvat ure bound follows
from an area bound by Gauss–Bonnet. However, our surfaces St are minimal with
respect to the gt metrics, which have no uniform upper bound on their sectiona l
curvature, so we must work slightly harder to show that the th eSt have uniformly
bounded total curvature. More precisely , we show that their restrictions to the
complement of any ﬁxed tubular neighborhood Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded
total curvature.
Lemma 1.22 (Finite total curvature). LetSt be the surfaces constructed in Lemma 1.20.
Fix some small, positive ǫ. Then the subsurfaces
S′
t :=St∩ M\Nǫ(Γ)
have uniformly bounded total curvature.
Proof. Having chosenǫ, we choose t large enough so that r(1− t)<ǫ/ 2.
Observe ﬁrstly that each St hasgt area less that the gt area of S, and therefore
hyperbolic area less that the hyperbolic area of S for sufﬁciently larget.
Letτt,s = St∩ ∂N s(Γ) for small s. By the coarea formula (see [Fed],[CM] page
8) we can estimate
area(St∩ (Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ)))≥
∫ ǫ
ǫ/ 2
length(τt,s )ds
12 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
If the integral of geodesic curvature along a component σ ofτt,ǫ is large, then the
length of the curves obtained by isotoping σ intoSt∩ Nǫ(Γ) grows very rapidly ,
by the deﬁnition of geodesic curvature.
Since there is an a priori bound on the hyperbolic area of St, it follows that there
cannot be any long components of τt,s with big integral geodesic curvature. More
precisely , consider a long component σ of τt,s . For l∈ [0,ǫ/ 2] the boundary σl
of the l-neighborhood of σ in St∩ Nǫ(Γ) is contained in Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ). If the
integral of the geodesic curvature along σl were sufﬁciently large for everyl, then
the derivative of the length of the σl would be large for every l, and therefore the
lengths of the σl would be large for all l∈ [ǫ/ 4,ǫ/ 2]. It follows that the hyperbolic
area of the ǫ/ 2 collar neighborhood of σ in St would be very large, contrary to
existence of an a priori upper bound on the total hyperbolic area of St.
This contradiction implies that for somel, the integral of the geodesic curvature
along σl can be bounded from above. T o summarize, for each constant C1 > 0
there is a constant C2 > 0, such that for each component σ ofτt,ǫ which has length
≥ C1 there is a loop
σ ′⊂ St∩ (Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ))
isotopic toσ by a short isotopy , satisfying
∫
σ ′
κdl ≤ C2
On the other hand, since St isgt minimal, there is a constant C1 > 0 such that
each componentσ ofτt,ǫ which has length≤ C1 bounds a hyperbolic globally least
area disk which is contained inM\Nǫ/ 2(Γ). For t sufﬁciently close to 1, such a disk
is contained in M\Nr(1− t)(Γ), and therefore must actually be a subdisk of St.
By the coarea formula above, we can choose ǫ so that length(τt,s ) is a priori
bounded. It follows that if S′′
t is the subsurface of St bounded by the components of τt,s of length > C1 then we have a priori upper bounds on the area of S′′
t ,
on
∫
∂S ′′
t
κdl , and on −χ (S′′
t ). Moreover, S′′
t is contained in M\Nr(1− t) where the
metricgt agrees with the hyperbolic metric, so the curvature K ofS′′
t is bounded
above by− 1 pointwise, by Lemma 1.2. By the Gauss–Bonnet formula, this g ives
an a priori upper bound on the total curvature of S′′
t , and therefore onS′
t⊂ S′′
t . □
Remark 1.23. A more highbrow proof of Lemma 1.22 follows from Theorem 1
of [S], using the fact that the surfaces S′
t are locally least area for the hyperbolic
metric, fort sufﬁciently close to 1 (depending onǫ).
Lemma 1.24 (Limit exists) . Let St be the surfaces constructed in Lemma 1.20. Then
there is an increasing sequence
0<t 1<t 2<···
such that limi→∞ ti = 1 , and the Sti converge on compact subsets of M\Γ in the C∞
topology to some T ′⊂ M\Γ with closureT inM .
Proof. By deﬁnition, the surfaces St havegt area bounded above by the gt area of
S. Moreover, since S is disjoint from Γ, for sufﬁciently large t, the gt area of S is
equal to the hyperbolic area of S. Since the gt area dominates the hyperbolic area,
it follows that the St have hyperbolic area bounded above, and by Lemma 1.22,
for any ǫ, the restrictions of St to M\Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded ﬁnite total
curvature.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 13
Moreover, by Lemma 1.21, each St is contained in a ﬁxed compact subset of
M . By standard compactness theorems (see e.g. [CiSc]) any inﬁ nite sequence Sti
contains a subsequence which converges on compact subsets o fE\Γ, away from
ﬁnitely many points where some subsurface with nontrivial t opology might collapse. That is, there might be isolated points p such that for any neighborhood U
ofp, the intersection of Sti withU contains loops which are essential in Sti for all
sufﬁcient largei.
But S is 2–incompressible rel. Γ, so in particular it is incompressible in M\Γ,
and no such collapse can take place. So after passing to a subs equence, a limit
T ′⊂ M\Γ exists (compare [MSY]). Since each St is a globally least area surface
inM\Nf (t)(Γ) with respect to the gt metric, it is a locally least area surface with
respect to the hyperbolic metric on M\Nr(1− t)(Γ). It follows that T ′ is locally least
area in the hyperbolic metric, properly embedded in M\Γ, and we can deﬁne T to
be the closure of T ′ inM . □
Lemma 1.25 (Interpolating isotopy). Let{ti} be the sequence as in Lemma 1.24. Then
after possibly passing to a subsequence, there is an isotopy F : S× [0, 1)→ M\Γ such
that
F (S,t i) = Sti
and such that for each p∈ S the track of the isotopy F (p, [0, 1)) either converges to some
well–deﬁned limit F (p, 1)∈ M\Γ or else it is eventually contained in Nǫ(Γ) for any
ǫ> 0.
Proof. Fix some smallǫ. Outside Nǫ(Γ), the surfaces Sti converge uniformly in the
C∞ topology toT ′. It follows that for any ǫ, and fori sufﬁciently large (depending
onǫ), the restrictions ofSti andSti+1 to the complement of Nǫ(Γ) are both sections
of the exponentiated unit normal bundle of T ′\Nǫ(Γ), and therefore we can isotope these subsets of Sti toSti+1 along the ﬁbers of the normal bundle. W e wish
to patch this partial isotopy together with a partial isotop y supported in a small
neighborhood ofNǫ(Γ) to deﬁne the correct isotopy from Sti toSti+1.
Let Z be obtained from Nǫ(Γ) by isotoping it slightly into M\Nǫ(Γ) so that it
is transverse to T , and therefore also to Sti fori sufﬁciently large. For each i, we
consider the intersection
τi =Sti∩ ∂Z
and observe that the limit satisﬁes
lim
i→∞
τi =τ =T∩ ∂Z
Let σ be a component of τ which is inessential in ∂Z . Then for large i, σ can
be approximated by σi ⊂ τi which are inessential in ∂Z . Since the Sti are 2–
incompressible rel. Γ, the loops σi must bound subdisks Di ofSti. Since ∂Z is a
convex surface with respect to the hyperbolic metric, and th egt metric agrees with
the hyperbolic metric outside Z for larget, it follows that the disks Di are actually
contained inZ\Γ for largei. It follows that Di andDi+1 are isotopic by an isotopy
supported inZ\Γ, which restricts to a very small isotopy of σi toσi+1 in∂Z .
Let σ be a component of τ which is essential in ∂Z . Then so is σi for large
i. Again, since S, and therefore Sti is 2–incompressible rel. Γ, it follows that σi
cannot be a meridian of ∂Z , and must actually be a longitude. It follows that there
is another essential curve σ ′
i in each τi, such that the essential curves σ ′
i and σi
14 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
cobound a subsurface Ai inSti∩ Z\Γ. After passing to a diagonal subsequence,
we can assume that the σ ′
i converge to some component σ ′ ofτ.
By 2–incompressibility , the surfacesAi are annuli. Note that there are two relative isotopy classes of such annuli. By passing to a further d iagonal subsequence,
we can assume Ai andAi+1 are isotopic in Z\Γ by an isotopy which restricts to a
very small isotopy of σi∪ σ ′
i toσi+1∪ σ ′
i+1 in∂Z .
W e have shown that for any smallǫ and any sequenceSti, there is an arbitrarily
large index i and inﬁnitely many indices j withi < jso that the surfaces Sti and
Stj are isotopic, and the isotopy can be chosen to have the follow ing properties:
(1) The isotopy takes Nǫ(Γ)∩ Sti to Nǫ(Γ)∩ Stj by an isotopy supported in
Nǫ(Γ).
(2) Outside Nǫ(Γ), the tracks of the isotopy are contained in ﬁbers of the exponentiated normal bundle of T ′\Nǫ(Γ).
Choose a sequence ǫi→ 0, and pick a subsequence of the Sti’s and relabel so that
Sti,S ti+1 satisfy the properties above with respect toNǫi(Γ). Then the composition
of this inﬁnite sequence of isotopies is F . □
Remark 1.26. The reason for the circumlocutions in the statement of Lemma 1.25
is that we have not yet proved that T is a limit of the St as maps fromS toM . This
will follow in §1.6, where we analyze the structure of T near a point p∈ Γ, and
show it has a well–deﬁned tangent cone.
1.6. Existence of tangent cone. W e have constructedT as a subset ofM , and have
observed that away from Γ,T is a minimal surface for the hyperbolic metric. W e
refer to the intersection T∩ Γ as the coincidence set. In general, one cannot expect
T to be smooth along the coincidence set. However, we show that it does have a
well-deﬁned tangent cone in the sense of Gromov , and this tangent cone is in fact
of a very special form. In particular, this is enough to imply that T exists as the
image of a map from S toM , and we may extend the isotopy F :S× [0, 1)→ M
to a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M withT =F (S, 1).
By a tangent cone we mean the following: at each point p∈ T∩ Γ, consider
the pair of metric spaces (Ns(p),T s(p)) whereTs(p) is the intersection Ts = T∩
Ns(p). W e rescale the metric on this pair by the factor 1/s . Then we claim that this
sequence of (rescaled) pairs of metric spaces converge in th e Gromov-Hausdorff
sense to a limit (B,C ) where B is the unit ball in Euclidean 3-space, and C is
the cone (to the origin) over a great bigon in the unit sphere. Here by a great
bigon we mean the union of two spherical geodesics joining antipod al points in
the sphere. In fact we do not quite show that T has this structure, but rather
that each local branch of T has this structure. Here we are thinking of the map
F (·, 1) : S→ M whose image is T , and by “local branch” we mean the image of a
regular neigborhood of a point preimage.
Lemma 1.27 (T angent cone). LetT be as constructed in Lemma 1.24. Let p∈ T∩ Γ.
Then near p, T is a (topologically immersed) surface, each local branch of which has a
well–deﬁned tangent cone, which is the cone on a great bigon.
Proof. W e use what is essentially a curve–shortening argument. For each small s,
deﬁne
Ts =∂N s(p)∩ T
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 15
For each point q∈ T\Γ, we deﬁne α (q) to be the angle between the tangent space
to T at q, and the radial geodesic through q emanating from p. By the coarea
formula, we can calculate
area(T∩ Ns(p)) =
∫ s
0
∫
Tt
1
cos(α )dldt≥
∫ s
0
length(Tt)dt
wheredl denotes the length element in each Tt. Note that this estimate implies
thatTt is rectiﬁable for a.e. t. W e chooses to be such a rectiﬁable value.
Now , each component τ of Ts is a limit of components τi of Sti∩ ∂N s(p) for
largei. By 2–incompressibility of the Sti , each τi is a loop bounding a subdisk Di
ofSti for largei.
Now ,∂N s(p) is convex in the hyperbolic metric, though not necessarily i n the
gt metric. By cutting out the disks ∂N s(p)∩ Nr(1− t)(Γ) and replacing them with
the disks D± orthogonal to Γ which are totally geodesic in both the gt and the
hyperbolic metrics, we can approximate ∂N s(p) by a surface ∂B bounding a ball
B⊂ Ns(p) which is convex in the gs metric for all s≥ t. The ball B is illustrated
in ﬁgure 1.
Ns(p)
D±Γ
B
FIGURE 1. The ball B has boundary which is convex in both the
hyperbolic and the gs metrics for all s≥ t
Note that after liftingB to the universal cover, there is a retraction ontoB which
is length non-increasing, in both the gt and the hyperbolic metric. This retraction
projects along the ﬁbers of the product structure on Nr(1− t)(Γ) toD± , and outside
Nr(1− t)(Γ), it is the nearest point projection to ∂B\D± .
Letτ′
i be the component ofSti∩∂B approximatingτi, and letD′
i be the subdisk
ofSti which it bounds.
Then the disk D′
i must be contained in B, or else we could decrease its gt and
hyperbolic area by the retraction described above. The disk sD′
i converge to the
componentD⊂ T ′ bounded by τ, and the hyperbolic areas of the D′
i converge to
the hyperbolic area of D.
Note that B as above is really shorthand for Bt, since it depends on a choice of
t. Similarly we have τt andDt. Since the component Dt⊂ T ′ bounded by τt is
contained inBt for allt, the component D⊂ T ′ bounded byτ⊂ ∂N s is contained
16 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
inNs, since Bt→ Ns ast→ 1. So we can, and do, work with Ns(p) instead of B
in the sequel.
Now , letD′ be the cone on τ to the point p. D′ can be perturbed an arbitrarily
small amount to an embedded disk D′′, and therefore by comparing D′′with the
D′
i, we see that the hyperbolic area ofD′ must be at least as large as that ofD. Note
that this perturbation can be taken to move D′ off Γ, and can be approximated by
perturbations which miss Γ. Similar facts are true for all the perturbations we
consider in the sequel.
Since this is true for each componentτ ofTs, by abuse of notation we can replace
T by the component of T∩ Ns(p) bounded by a single mapped in circle τ. This
will be the local “branch” of the topologically immersed sur face T . W e use this
notational convention for the remainder of the proof of the l emma. Note that the
inequality above still holds. It follows that we must have
area(T∩ Ns(p))≤
∫ s
0
length(Ts) sinh(t)
sinh(s)dt = area(cone onTs)
Now , for each sphere∂N s(p), we letφ be the projection, along hyperbolic geodesics,
to the unit sphere S2 in the tangent space at p. For each t∈ (0, 1], deﬁne
∥Tt∥ = length(φ(Tt)) = length(Tt)
sinh(t)
It follows from the inequalities above that for some interme diate s′ we must
have
∥Ts′∥≤∥ Ts∥
with equality iff T∩ Ns(p) is equal to the cone on Ts.
Now , the cone onTs is not locally least area for the hyperbolic metric inNs(p)\Γ
unlessTs is a great circle or geodesic bigon in ∂N s(p) (with endpoints on∂N s(p)∩
Γ), in which case the lemma is proved. T o see this, just observe that a cone has vanishing principal curvature in the radial direction, so its m ean curvature vanishes
iff it is totally geodesic away from Γ.
So we may suppose that for any s there is some s′< ssuch that∥Ts′∥ <∥Ts∥.
Therefore we choose a sequence of valuessi withsi→ 0 such that∥Tsi∥>∥Tsi+1∥,
such that∥Tsi∥ converges to the inﬁmal value of∥Tt∥ witht∈ (0,s ], and such that
∥Tsi∥ is the minimal value of∥Tt∥ on the intervalt∈ [si, 1]. Note that for any small
t, the cone on Tt has area
area(cone onTt) = t
2 length(Tt) +O(t3) = t2
2∥Tt∥ +O(t3)
The set of loops in the sphere with length bounded above by som e constant,
parameterized by arclength, is compact, by the Arzela–Ascoli theorem, and so we
can suppose that the φ(Tsi ) converge in the Hausdorff sense to a loop C⊂ S2.
Claim. C is a geodesic bigon.
Proof. W e suppose not, and will obtain a contradiction.
W e ﬁx notation: for each i, let Ci denote the inverse image φ − 1(C) under φ :
∂N si(p)→ S2. So Ci is a curve in ∂N si(p). By the cone on Ci we mean the union
of the hyperbolic geodesic segments in Nsi(p) fromCi top. By the cone on C we
mean the union of the geodesic segments in the unit ball in Euc lidean 3-space from
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 17
C⊂ S2 to the origin. For each i, we have an estimate
area(cone onCi) = s2
i area(cone onC) +O(s3
i )
For eachi, letT i denote the surface obtained from T∩ Nsi(p) by rescaling metrically by 1/s i. Then T i is a surface with boundary contained in a ball of radius
1 in a space of constant curvature −s2
i . Moreover, it enjoys the same least area
properties asT∩ Nsi (p).
By the monotonicity property of the ∥Tsi∥ and the coarea formula, we have an
inequality
lim
i→∞
area(T i)≥ area(cone onC)
On the other hand, since each T i is least area, we have an estimate
1
2∥Tsi∥ +O(si) = area(cone onTsi)
s2
i
≥ area(T i)
It follows that the limit of the area of the T i is actually equal to the area of the cone
onC.
On the other hand, since the φ(Tsi ) converge to C, for sufﬁciently large i we
can ﬁnd an immersed annulus Ai inS2 with area≤ κ for any positive κ, which
is the track of a homotopy (in S2) from φ(Tsi ) to C. W e let φ − 1(Ai) denote the
corresponding annulus in∂N si(p)
W e can build a new immersed surface bounded byTsi which is the union of this
annulusφ − 1(Ai) with the cone on Ci. This surface can be perturbed an arbitrarily
small amount, away from Γ, to an embedded surface F i. After rescaling F i by
1/s i, we get a surface Gi with the same boundary as T i of area equal to
area(Gi) = area( cone onC) +κ +O(si)
SinceT i is locally least area, it follows that for any κ > 0, for sufﬁciently large i
(depending onκ),
area(cone onC) + 2κ≥ area(Gi)≥ area(T i)≥ area(cone onC)− κ
The surfaceF i contains a subsurface which is the cone on Ci. Since by hypothesis, C is not a geodesic bigon, the cone on C can be perturbed by a compactly
supported perturbation to a surface whose area is smaller th an that of the cone
onC by some deﬁnite amount ǫ. Similarly , the cone on Ci can be perturbed by a
compactly supported perturbation to a surface whose area is smaller than the cone
onCi byǫ(si)2 whereǫ is independent of i. After rescaling by 1/s i, It follows that
Gi can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to H i with the same
boundary asGi andT i, for which
area(H i)≤ area(Gi)− ǫ
whereǫ is independent ofi. Since κ may be chosen as small as we like, we choose
3κ<ǫ . Then for sufﬁciently large i we get
area(H i)< area(T i)
which contradicts the least area property of T i. This contradiction shows that C is
actually a geodesic bigon, and completes the proof of the cla im. □
18 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
W e now complete the proof of Lemma 1.27.
LetC⊂ S2 be this geodesic bigon. Then inside an ǫ neighborhood of C inS2,
we can ﬁnd a pair of curves C± , whereC+ is convex, and C− is convex except for
two acute angles on T Γ∩ S2. For each i, letC±
i ⊂ ∂N si(p) be the inverse image of
C± underφ.
The cone on C±
i is a pair of barrier surfaces in Ns(p). In particular, once φ(Tsi )
andφ(Tsi+1 ) are both trapped between C+ andC− , the same is true of φ(Ts′) for
alls′∈ [si+1,s i]. This is enough to establish the existence of the tangent con e. □
Notice that Lemma 1.27 actually implies that T is a rectiﬁable surface in M ,
which is a local (topological) embedding. In particular, th is shows that the isotopy
F :S× [0, 1)→ M constructed in Lemma 1.25 can be chosen to limit to a homotopy
F :S× [0, 1]→ M such thatF (S, 1) = T .
1.7. The thin obstacle problem. From the proof of Lemma 1.27, we see that T
exists as a C0 map which by abuse of notation we denote u : T → M . One may
immediately improve the regularity ofu. From the construction ofT , it is standard
to show that u is actually in the Sobolev space H 1, 2 — that is, the derivative du is
deﬁned, and is L2, in the sense of distribution; see [Mor] for a rigorous deﬁni tion
of Sobolev spaces, and basic properties.
T o see this, observe thatu is a limit of maps F (·,t i) : S→ M which are minimal
for the gt metric, and therefore are L2 energy minimizers for the conformal structure onS pulled back by F (·,t i). If the set of conformal structures obtained in this
way is precompact, one may extract a limit and therefore boun d theL2 norm ofdu
in terms of the L2 norms of the derivatives of any F (·,t i). How can the sequence
of conformal structures fail to be precompact? If and only if the conformal structures degenerate by a neck pinch. But the 2–incompressibility of S rel. Γ implies
that there is a lower bound on the length of the image of any ess ential curve in S.
It follows that the L2 norm of the derivative blows up along such a pinching neck,
contrary to the energy minimizing property . So no such degen eration can occur,
andu is inH 1, 2 as claimed. This argument is essentially contained in [SY] ( see e.g.
Lemma 3.1, page 134), and one may consult this paper for detai ls.
W e need to establish further regularity of du along Γ in the following sense.
Recall that we are calling L := T∩ Γ the coincidence set. For each local sheet of T ,
we want u to be C1 along the interior of L from either side, and at a non–interior
point ofL, we want u to beC1 on the nose.
Now , ifI⊂ L is an interval, then the reﬂection principle (see [Oss]) imp lies that
each local sheet T + ofT with∂T + =I can be analytically continued to a minimal
surface across I, by taking another copy of T +, rotating it through angle π along
the axisI and gluing it to the original T + alongI. It follows that du is real analytic
from either side along the interior of L. Note that if the tangent cone at a point p
is not literally a tangent plane, then an easy comparison argument implies that p is
an interior point of the coincidence set. See [N] page 90 for a fuller discussion.
Non–interior points of L are more difﬁcult to deal with, and we actually want
to conclude thatdu is continuous at such points. Fortunately , this is a well–known
problem in the theory of variational problems, known as the Signorini problem, or
the (two dimensional) thin obstacle problem.
In the literature, this problem is usually formulated in the following terms:
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 19
Thin Obstacle Problem. Let Ω be a bounded open subset of R2, andA an oriented
line contained in Ω. Letψ :A→ R andg :∂Ω→ R be given, withg≥ ψ on∂Ω∩A.
Deﬁne
K ={v∈ g +H 1,p
0 |v≥ ψ onA}
Minimize
J(u) =
∫
F (x,u, ∇ u)dx
overu∈ K.
HereH 1,p denotes the usual Sobolev space over Ω for the Lp norm, with zero
boundary conditions.
The main conditions typically imposed on F are sufﬁcient regularity of F and
its partial derivatives (Lipschitz is usually enough) and ellipticity, meaning that
the matrix (Fik)i,k =1, 2 of the second partial derivatives of F (x,u,η ) with respect
toη∈ R2 is uniformly positive deﬁnite on compact subsets of Ω× R2+1 (see [Fre]
page 281 for details). Roughly speaking, F is elliptic if the critical functions of
the functional J satisfy a “mean value property” — the value at each point is a
weighted average of the value at nearby points.
For example, if we want the graph of u to be a (Euclidean) minimal surface
away from ψ (A), then the formula for F isF = (1 +|∇u|2)1/ 2 which is certainly
real analytic and elliptic. The deﬁnition of F for a nonparametric minimal surface
in exponential co–ordinates on hyperbolic space is more complicated, but certainly
F is real analytic and elliptic in the sense of Frehse.
See Figure 2 for an example of the graph of a function solving t he Dirichlet thin
obstacle problem, whereψ|A is constant. This surface is visually indistinguishable
from the graph of the function solving the unparameterized m inimal surface thin
obstacle problem with the same boundary and obstacle data, b ut for computer
implementation, the Dirichlet problem is less computation ally costly .
The next theorem establishes not only the desired continuit y of∂u, but actually
gives an estimate for the modulus of continuity . The followi ng is a restatement of
Theorem 1.3 on page 26 of [Ri] in our context:
Theorem 1.28 (Richardson [Ri] Regularity of thin obstacle). Letu be a solution to the
thin obstacle problem for F elliptic in the sense of Frehse and p∈ [1,∞ ], and suppose that
∂Ω,ψ,g are smooth. Then ∂u is continuous along A in the tangent direction, one–sided
continuous in the normal direction on either side, and conti nuous in the normal direction
at a non–interior point. Furthermore, ∂u is H¨ older continuous, with exponent 1/ 2; i.e.
the modulus of continuity of ∂u isO(t1/ 2).
Remark 1.29. Note that C1+1/ 2 is actually best possible. Consider the function
u : z→ Im(z3/ 2) for u∈ C slit along the positive real axis, where we take the
branch which is negative sufﬁciently close to the slit. This solves a thin obstacle
problem for the Dirichlet integral, and is only C1+1/ 2 atz = 0.
Remark 1.30. For our applications, the fact thatu isC1+1/ 2 is more than necessary .
In fact, all we use is that u isC1. This is proved (with a logarithmic modulus of
continuity for du) by [Fre], and (with a H ¨ older modulus of continuity for du) in
arbitrary dimension by [K].
W e apply this theorem to our context:
20 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
FIGURE 2. The graph of a function solving the thin obstacle problem
Lemma 1.31 (Regularity along coincidence set) . Foru :T→ M deﬁned as above, the
derivativedu along local sheets ofT is continuous from each side along the coincidence set
L, and continuous at non–interior points.
Proof. Ifp is an interior point of L, this follows by the reﬂection principle. Otherwise, by Lemma 1.27 and the discussion above, the tangent con e is a planeπ in the
tangent space at p.
W e show how to choose local co–ordinates in a ballB near each pointp∈ L such
thatB∩ Γ is thex–axis, each local sheet of T is the graph of a function u : Ω→ R,
and u is non–negative along the x–axis. Let γ = B∩ Γ, and let γ ′ be another
geodesic throughp orthogonal to γ and tangent to π . LetF andG be foliations of
B by totally geodesic planes orthogonal to γ andγ ′ respectively . Then each leaf of
F is totally geodesic for both the hyperbolic and the gt metric for all t, and each
leaf ofG is totally geodesic for the gt metric for sufﬁciently large t. It follows that
T has no source or sink singularities with respect to either fo liation. Since T∩ B
is a (topological) disk, by reasons of Euler characteristic it can have no saddle
singularities either, and therefore no singularities at al l. W e letF andG be level
sets of two co–ordinate functions on B. Deﬁne a third co–ordinate function to be
(signed) hyperbolic distance to the plane containing γ andγ ′, and observe that u
is a graph in these co–ordinates.
It follows that u solves an instance of the thin obstacle problem, and by Theorem 1.28 or by [Fre] or [K] the desired regularity of du follows. □
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 21
Remark 1.32. The structure of the coincidence set is important to underst and, and
it has been studied by various authors. Hans Lewy [Lew] showe d that for J the
Dirichlet integral andψ analytic, the coincidence set is a ﬁnite union of points and
intervals. Athanasopoulos [Ath] proved the same result for the minimal surface
question, for symmetric domain Ω and obstacleA, but his (very short and elegant)
proof relies fundamentally on the symmetry of the problem, a nd we do not see
how it applies in our context.
Note that if the Hausdorff dimension of the coincidence set i s strictly< 1, then
sinceT isC1+1/ 2 (and therefore Lipschitz) along this coincidence set, the t heory of
removable singularities implies that T is actually real analytic along Γ. It follows
in this case that the coincidence set consists of a ﬁnite unio n of isolated points, and
thatT is actually a minimal surface. See e.g. [Car] for details.
Remark 1.33. Existence results for the thin obstacle problem for minimal surfaces
with analytic obstacles (see e.g. [Ri], [K], [N]) gives an al ternative proof of the
existence of the limit T . Given S, we can shrinkwrap S near Γ in small balls by
using existence for the thin obstacle problem, and away from Γ by replacing small
disks with least area embedded disks with the same boundary . The argument of
[HS] implies that for S 2–incompressible, this converges to a surface T .
1.8. CAT(− 1) property . W e have shown that T satisﬁes all the properties of the
conclusion of Theorem 1.10, except that we have not yet shown that it is intrinsically CAT(− 1). In this subsection we show that after possibly replacing T by a
new surface with the same properties, we can insist thatT is CAT(− 1) with respect
to the path metric induced from M .
Lemma 1.34 (CAT(-1) property). After possibly replacingT by a new immersed surface
with the same properties, T is CAT(− 1) with respect to the path metric induced from M .
Proof. T o show thatT is CAT(− 1) we will show that there is no distributional positive curvature concentrated along the coincidence set L. Since T\Γ is a minimal
surface, the curvature of T is bounded above by − 1 on this subset. It will follow
by Gauss–Bonnet that T is CAT(− 1).
W e ﬁrst treat a simpler problem in Euclidean 3–space, which we denote by R3.
Let Σ be an embedded surface in R3 which is C3 outside a subset X which is
contained in a geodesic γ in R3, and which is C1 alongX from either side along
the interior of X, and C1 at non–interior points of X. Then we claim, for each
subsurfaceR⊂ Σ withC3 boundary∂R⊂ Σ\X, that
∫
R\ X
KΣ = 2πχ (R)−
∫
∂R
κdl
Compare Lemma 1.3.
In other words, we want to show that X is a “removable singularity” for R, at
least with respect to the Gauss–Bonnet formula.
Letφ : R\X→ S2 denote the Gauss map, which takes each point p∈ R to its
unit normal, in the unit sphere of S2. Then KΣ is the pullback of the area form by
φ. Let R denote the completion of R\X with respect to the path metric. Then R
is obtained from R by cutting it open along each interval in R∩ X, and sewing in
two copies of the interval thereby removed. Notice that ther e is a natural forgetful
mapR→ R.
22 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
By the assumptions about the regularity ofR, the Gauss mapφ actually extends
to a continuous mapφ :R→ S2. Moreover, since X is contained in a geodesic γ of
R3, the image φ(R\R) is contained in a great circle C inS2.
For each boundary component τ ofR, we claim that the map φ : τ→ C has
degree zero. For, otherwise, by a degree argument, there are pointsp± ∈ R which
map to the same point in p, for which φ(p+) = −φ(p− ), and the graphs of φ(p+)
and−φ(p− ) locally have a nonzero algebraic intersection number. It fo llows that
the local sheets of R from either side must actually intersect along p, contrary to
the fact that Σ is embedded. It follows that we can sew in a disk to R along each
boundary component to get a surface R
′
homeomorphic toR, with∂R
′
=∂R , and
extendφ toφ :R
′
→ S2 by mapping each such disk into C.
Now , the surfaceR
′
can be perturbed slightly in a neighborhood of X to a new
surfaceR
′′
which isC3 in R3, in such a way that the Gauss map of R
′′
is a perturbation ofφ. So the usual Gauss–Bonnet formula (Lemma 1.3) shows that
∫
R′′
K = 2πχ (R)−
∫
∂R
κdl
But
∫
R
′′K is just the integral of the area form on S2 pulled back by the Gauss map;
it follows that
∫
R
′′
K =
∫
S2
degree(φ(R
′
))
and ∫
S2
degree(φ(R
′′
)) =
∫
S2
degree(φ(R
′
))
since one map is obtained from the other by a small perturbati on supported away
from the boundary . Since the measure ofC is zero, this last integral is just equal to
∫
S2\ C
degree(φ(R
′
)) =
∫
R\ X
K
and the claim is proved.
Now we show how to apply this to our shrinkwrapped surface T . W e use the
following trick. Let jt with t∈ [0, 1) be a family of metrics on M , conformally
equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, which agree with the hy perbolic metric outsideNr(1− t), which are Euclidean onNr(1− t)/ 2, and which have curvature pinched
between− 1 and 0, and are rotationally and translationally symmetric along the
core geodesic. Then we let Tt be the surface obtained by shrinkwrapping S with
respect to the jt metric. I.e. we let gs,t be a family of metrics as in Deﬁnition 1.17
which agree with thejt metric outsideNr(1− t)(1− s), construct minimal surfacesSs,t
as in Lemma 1.20, and so on, limiting to the immersed surface Tt which is minimal for the jt metric on M\Γ, and C1+1/ 2 alongTt∩ Γ. Arguing locally as above,
we see that small subsurfaces of Tt contained in the Euclidean tubes Nr(1− t)/ 2 satisfy Gauss–Bonnet in the complement of the coincidence set. By Lemma 1.2, the
surfacesTt all have curvature bounded above by 0, and bounded above by− 1 outsideNr(1− t). By Gauss–Bonnet for geodesic triangles, Tt is CAT(0), and actually
CAT(− 1) outsideNr(1− t).
Now take the limit as t→ 1. Some subsequence of the surfaces Tt converges to
a limit which by abuse of notation we denote T . Note that this is not necessarily
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 23
the same as the surface T constructed in previous sections, but it enjoys the same
properties. Again, by Gauss–Bonnet for geodesic triangles , the limit is actually
CAT(− 1), and the lemma is proved. □
This completes the proof of Theorem 1.10.
Problem 1.35. Develop a simplicial or PL theory of shrinkwrapping.
Remark 1.36. Since this paper appeared in preprint form, Soma has develop ed
some elements of a PL theory of shrinkwrapping; see [Som]. Th is theory proves a
PL analogue of Theorem 1.10.
2. T HE MAIN CONSTRUCTION LEMMA
The purpose of this section is to state the main construction Lemma 2.3 and
show how it follows easily from Theorem 1.10.
2.1. Shrinkwrapping in covers. Let N be a complete, orientable, parabolic free
hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple
closed geodesics in N , just as in the statement of Theorem 1.10. For the purposes
of introducing the Main Construction Lemma, we will assume t hatN has a single
endE. W e consider the family of gt and gs,t metrics, as in Deﬁnition 1.17 and
Lemma 1.34.
Suppose there is an embedded surface ∂W inN\Γ which separates off the end
ofN from a compact submanifold W⊂ N . Let X be a covering space of W (possibly inﬁnite). The preimage of the geodesics Γ are a collection of locally ﬁnite
geodesics ˆΓ⊂ X, some of which might be ﬁnite, and some inﬁnite. Let ∆⊂ ˆΓ
be some nonempty collection, consisting entirely of simple closed geodesics. Then
we can consider a second surface S⊂ X\∆ and can ask whether it is possible to
shrinkwrapS rel. ∆. Notice that we cannot directly apply Theorem 1.10 because
the hyperbolic manifold X is not complete, and therefore a shrinkwrap representative of S might not exist. However, we note that for each metric gt onN , we get
agt locally least area representative ∂W t isotopic to ∂W . The submanifold Wt of
N bounded by∂W t lifts to a covering space Xt which is homeomorphic to X. The
metricgt pulls back to a metric on Xt which by abuse of notation we also refer to
asgt. Then ∂X t which is a lift of ∂W t isgt locally least area, and therefore acts as
a barrier surface. It follows that we can ﬁnd, for each t, a surface St in the isotopy
class of S inXt\Nf (t)(∆), which is globally gt-least area among all such surfaces
(compare with the statement of Lemma 1.20).
The theory of shrinkwrapping developed in§1 goes through almost identically
for the surfaces St with one important exception: the metric gt on Xt does not
agree with the hyperbolic metric away from ∆ and ∂X t, but rather is deformed
along the other geodesics ˆΓ\∆. It follows that we should take care to analyze the
quality of the surfaces St and their limit S′ near components of ˆΓ\∆.
Fortunately the situation is as simple as it could be:
Lemma 2.1 (Superﬂuous geodesics invisible). With notation and deﬁnitions as above,
in a neighborhood of a point p on ˆΓ\∆, the surface S′ is a locally least area surface for the
hyperbolic metric.
24 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Proof. Suppose not. Then there is a compactly supported perturbati on F of S′
which agrees with S′ outside a ﬁxed neighborhood of p, and which has strictly
less hyperbolic area thanS′, so that
area(S′)− area(F )≥ ǫ
for some positive constant ǫ. After another small perturbation of F toF ′, which
can be taken to increase the hyperbolic area as little as requ ired, we can assume
thatF ′ is transverse to Γ nearp, intersecting it in n points for some ﬁnite n, and
satisfying
area(S′)− area(F ′)≥ ǫ/ 2
By property (3) of the gt metric (see Lemma 1.18) the gt area ofF ′ is at most equal
to the hyperbolic area plus nC(1− t)2, for some constant C independent of t. For
sufﬁciently smallt,
nC(1− t)2<ǫ/ 2
and therefore the gt area of F ′ is less than the hyperbolic area of S′, which is less
than the gt area of S′, thereby contradicting the global gt minimality of S′ in its
isotopy class in Xt\Nf (t)(∆).
This contradiction proves the lemma. □
A similar argument holds for the gt,s metric in place of the gt metric, and therefore by means of Lemma 2.1 we can shrinkwrap in covers, obtain ing CAT (− 1)
surfaces in the limit.
Remark 2.2. One should think of Lemma 2.1 as a kind of “removable singular ity”
theorem for transverse obstacles. Compare with the followi ng physical experiment: one knows from experience that very thin needles can be pushed through
soap bubbles without popping them or distorting their geome try . (Try it!)
2.2. The main construction lemma. W e now state and prove the main construction lemma. The context of this Lemma is the same as that of §2.1: we want to
shrinkwrap a certain surface in a cover, using the boundary o f that cover as a barrier surface. See Figure 3 for an idealized depiction of T ′ andS inW andX in the
case thatW is a handlebody .
Lemma 2.3 (Main construction lemma). LetE be an end of the complete open orientable
parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold N with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Let
W⊂ N be a submanifold such that ∂W∩ int(N ) separatesW fromE. Let ∆1⊂ N\∂W
be a ﬁnite collection of simple closed geodesics with ∆ = int(W )∩ ∆1 a non–empty proper
subset of ∆1. Suppose further that ∂W is 2–incompressible rel. ∆.
LetG be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(W ), and let X be the covering space of W
corresponding to G. Let Σ be the preimage of ∆ inX, and ˆ∆⊂ Σ a subset which maps
homeomorphically onto ∆ under the covering projection, and let B⊂ ˆ∆ be a nonempty
union of geodesics. Suppose there exists an embedded closed surface S ⊂ X\B that is
2–incompressible rel.B inX, which separates every component of B from∂X .
Then∂W can be homotoped to a ∆1–minimal surface which, by abuse of notation, we
call∂W ′, and the map of S intoN given by the covering projection is homotopic to a map
whose image T ′ is ∆1–minimal. Also, ∂W ′ (resp. T ′) can be perturbed by an arbitrarily
small perturbation to be an embedded (resp. smoothly immers ed) surface ∂W t (resp. Tt)
boundingWt with the following properties:
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 25
(1) There exists an isotopy from ∂W to ∂W t which never crosses ∆1, and which
induces an isotopy from W toWt, and a corresponding deformation of hyperbolic
manifoldsX toXt which ﬁxes Σ pointwise.
(2) There exists an isotopy from S toSt⊂ Xt which never crosses B, such that Tt is
the projection of St toN .
W T ′ ⊂ W
S ⊂ X
FIGURE 3. The surfaces T ′ andS inW andX respectively
Proof. The proof is reasonably straightforward, given the work in §1 and §2.1.
First, we obtain∂W ′ from∂W by shrinkwrapping rel. ∆1. Since ∆ = int(W )∩ ∆1
is a nonempty and proper subset of ∆1, ∂W satisﬁes the hypotheses of Theorem 1.10, and therefore ∂W ′ exists, and satisﬁes the desired properties.
26 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
For each t = ti in our approximating sequence, the metric gt on Wt lifts to a
metric onXt which, by abuse of notation, we also call gt.
Then with respect to thegt metric,∂X t acts as a barrier surface, and we can ﬁnd
a gt locally least area surface St ⊂ int(Xt) which is gt globally least area in the
isotopy class of S inXt\Nf (t)(B), by [MSY], just as in the proof of Lemma 1.20.
Note thatS is necessarily homologically essential inXt\Nf (t)(B), since it separates
each component of B from∂X t by hypothesis, and therefore any surface isotopic
toS inXt\Nf (t)(B) must intersect a ﬁxed compact arc α fromB to∂X t.
The immersed surfaces Tt⊂ N are obtained by mapping St toWt by the covering projection. After passing to a further subsequence of valuest =ti, the limit
of the Tt surfaces exists as a map from S toN , with image T ′, by the argument of
Lemma 1.24 applied locally . The regularity ofT ′ locally along ∆1 follows from the
argument of Lemma 1.31, since that argument is completely lo cal.
As in Lemma 1.34, we can repeat the construction above with th egs,t metrics
and obtain a limit T ′ with the desired regularity .
It follows that T ′ is ∆1–minimal. Notice that some local sheets of T ′ are actually minimal (in the hyperbolic metric) near geodesics in ∆1, corresponding to
subsets ofSt inXt crossing components of Σ\B, by Lemma 2.1. In any case, T ′ is
intrinsically CAT(− 1), and the theorem is proved. □
2.3. Nonsimple geodesics. When we come to consider hyperbolic manifolds with
parabolics, we need to treat the case that the geodesics ∆1 might not be simple. But
there is a standard trick to reduce this case to the simple cas e, at the cost of slightly
perturbing the hyperbolic metric.
Explicitly , suppose Γ⊂ M is as in the statement of Theorem 1.10 except that
some of the components are possibly not simple. Then for ever yǫ> 0 there exists
a perturbation g of the hyperbolic metric on M in a neighborhood of Γ with the
following properties:
(1) The new metric g agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Nǫ(Γ)
(2) With respect to the metric g, the curves in Γ are homotopic to a collection
of simple geodesics Γ′
(3) The metric g is hyperbolic (i.e. has constant curvature − 1) onNǫ/ 2(Γ′)
(4) The metric g is 1+ǫ–bilipschitz equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, and the
sectional curvature of the g metric is pinched between− 1− ǫ and− 1 +ǫ.
The existence of such a metric g follows from Lemma 5.5 of [Ca]. T o make an
orthopedic comparison: think of the nonsimple geodesics Γ as a collection of unnaturally fused bones in Nǫ(Γ); the bones are broken, reset, and heal as simple
geodesics in the new metric.
It is clear that the methods of§1 apply equally well to the metricg, and therefore
shrinkwrapping can be done with respect to the metric g, producing a surface
which is intrinsically CAT(− 1 +ǫ).
In fact, since such a metric exists for each ǫ, we can take a sequence of such metricsgǫ for each small ǫ >0, produce a shrinkwrapped surface Tǫ for each such ǫ,
and take a limit T asǫ→ 0 which is intrinsically CAT (− 1), and which can be approximated by embedded surfaces, isotopic toS, in the complement of Γ\C where
C is a ﬁnite subset of geodesics whose cardinality can be a priori bounded above in
terms of the genus of S. W e will not be using this stronger fact in the sequel, since
the existence of a CAT (− 1 +ǫ) surface is quite enough for our purposes.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 27
3. A SYMPTOTIC TUBE RADIUS AND LENGTH
By [Bo] an end of a complete hyperbolic 3–manifoldN is geometrically inﬁnite
if and only if there exists an exiting sequence of closed geod esics. In this chapter
we show that if π1(N ) is parabolic free, then the geodesics can be chosen to be
η–separated for some η; in particular, all are simple.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let N be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with geometrically
inﬁnite end E. Deﬁne the E-asymptotic tube radius to be the supremum over all
sequences{γi} of closed geodesics exitingE, of
lim sup
i→∞
tube radius(γi)
Similarly deﬁne the E-asymptotic length to be inﬁmum over all sequences {γi} as
before of
lim inf
i→∞
length(γi)
W e will drop the preﬁxE when the end in question is understood.
Proposition 3.2. IfE is a geometrically inﬁnite end of the complete hyperbolic 3- manifold
N without parabolics, then asymptotic tube radius> 1/ 4 asymptotic length. If asymptotic
length = 0, then asymptotic tube radius = ∞ . There exists a uniform lower bound η =
0. 025 to the asymptotic tube radius of a geometrically inﬁnite end of a complete parabolic
free hyperbolic 3–manifold.
Proof. Meyerhoff [Me] deﬁnes a monotonically decreasing function r : (0, 0. 1]→
[0. 3,∞ ) such that if γ is a closed geodesic in N and length(γ) ≤ t, then tube
radius(γ)≥ r(t). Furthermore lim t→ 0r(t) = ∞ . Therefore, the second statement
of Proposition 3.2 follows from [Me] and the third follows fr om the ﬁrst statement
and [Me]. (Actually , Proposition 3.3 will show that log(3)/ 2 is a lower bound.)
Now suppose that asymptotic length = L∈ [0. 1,∞ ). Then there exists a sequence{γi} exitingE such that length (γi) → L. As in §5 [G2], if tube radius
(γt)≤ 1
4 length(γi), then there exists a geodesic βi homotopic to a curve which
is a union of a segment of γi and an orthogonal arc from γi to itself, and each
of these segments has length ≤ length(γi)/ 2. By straightening these segments
and using the law of cosines, we see that if length (γi)≥ 0. 099, then length(βi) <
length(γi)− 0. 02. Thus if lim sup tube radius (γi) < L/ 4, there exists a sequence
{βi} such that lim inf length(βi)≤ L− 0. 02 whereβi is as above. Since∞ >L ,{βi}
must exit the same end as{γi}, which is a contradiction.
Now suppose that asymptotic length is inﬁnite and {γi} is an exiting sequence
such that length(γi)→∞ . Given R≥ 10 we produce a new exiting sequence{σi}
with tube radius (σi) > Rfor all i. If possible let α i be a smallest segment of γi
such that there is a geodesic path βi connecting ∂α i, length(βi)≤ 10R and βi is
not homotopic to α i rel endpoints. If α i does not exist, then tube radius (γi)≥ 5R.
So let us assume that for all i, α i exists. Note that length(α i)→ ∞ or else the
concatenations{α i∗βi} are homotopic to an exiting sequence of bounded length
geodesics. Also, asymptotic length inﬁnite implies that as i→ ∞ , the injectivity radius of points of γi (and hence α i∪ βi)→ ∞ . Therefore for i sufﬁciently
large we can assume that length(α i)> 10R, length(β ) = 10R, and both of the angles between βi andα i are at least π/ 2. The geodesic σi homotopic to the curve
obtained by concatenating α i andβi lies within distance 2 of α i∪ βi and for the
most part lies extremely close. Indeed, if A is an immersed least area annulus in
28 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
N with ∂A = α i∗βi∪ σi, then the Gauss–Bonnet formula (Lemma 1.4) implies
that area (A)≤ π . Since the intrinsic curvature of A is≤− 1, it follows that for i
sufﬁciently large, no point a ofA can be at distance 1 fromα i∪ βi and distance at
least 1 fromσi, for the area of the disc of radius 1 about a∈ A would be≥ π .
If tube radius (σi)≤ R, then there would be an arc τi connecting points of σi
such that length(τi)≤ 2R andτi cannot be homotoped rel endpoints into σi. Thus,
fori sufﬁciently large one ﬁnds new essential geodesic paths β ′
i of length≤ 10R
with endpoints in α i− ∂α i. This contradicts the minimality property of α i. □
Proposition 3.3. IfE is an end of the complete, orientible, hyperbolic 3-manifol dN and
π1(N ) has no parabolic elements, then the E-asymptotic tube radius> log(3)/ 2.
Remark 3.4. W e will not be using Proposition 3.3 in this paper.
Proof. Let{γi} be a sequence of geodesics exitingE such that
lim
i
length(γi) = l =E–asymptotic length.
Ifl is small, i.e.l≤ 0. 978, then fori sufﬁciently large, tube radius (γi)≥ log(3)/ 2
by [Me] as explained in Proposition 1.11[GMT]. If l is large, then for i sufﬁciently
large tube radius (γi)≥ log(3)/ 2 by Proposition 3.2. A hyperbolic geometry argument, slightly more sophisticated than the one cited above shows thatl≥ 1. 289785
sufﬁces. Indeed, the proof of Proposition 1.11 [GMT] shows t hat there exists
ǫ > 0 such that if length(γi)≥ 1. 289785, then either tube radius (γi)≥ log(3)/ 2
or there exists an essential closed curve κ i such that length (κ i)≤ length(γi)− ǫ
andd(γi,κ i)≤ l. If κ ∗
i denotes the geodesic homotopic to κ i, then{κ ∗
i} exitsE and
lim inf length(κ ∗
i )≤ l− ǫ which contradicts the fact that l is asymptotic length.
It follows from [GMT], [GMT], [JR], [Li] and [CLLM] that if δ is a shortest geodesic in a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold N , then either tube radius δ≥ log(3)/ 2
orN is a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold. (See Conjecture 1.31 [GM T].) Therefore, if
eachγi is a shortest length geodesic inN , then the proof of Proposition 3.3 follows.
Assuming that asymptotic tube radius < log(3)/ 2, we will derive a contradiction using techniques which require an understanding of§1 [GMT]. Nevertheless,
the punchline follows exactly as in two paragraphs above. He re is the idea. Associated to each γi there is a 2–generator subgroup of π1(N ) deﬁned as follows.
When viewed as acting on H3, one generatorfi is a shortest translation along a lift
ofγi and the other generator wi takes that lift to a nearest translate. After passing
to a subsequence, there exists ǫ > 0, K <∞ such that for each i, there exists a
closed curve κ i such that d(κ i,γ i)≤ K and length (κ i) < lengthγi− ǫ. Here κ i
represents an element in the group generated by fi andwi.
Here are the details. Given {γi} there exist sequences{Ai},{A′
i} whereAi is a
lift ofγi to H3 andA′
i =wi(A) is a nearestπ1(N ) translate ofA, wherewi∈ π1(N ).
By Deﬁnition 1.8 [GMT] associated to fi andwi there is a triple of complex numbers (Li,D i,R i) where length(fi) = Re(Li) and Re (Di) = d(A,A ′). By compactness, after passing to a subsequence, {(Li,D i,R i)} converges to (L,D,R ), where
Re(L) = l. Again by Deﬁnition 1.8, (L,D,R ) gives rise to a marked 2–generator
group⟨f,w ⟩ wherefi→ f andwi→ w. By Lemma 1.13 [GMT] we can assume
that (L,D,R ) and the various (Li,D i,R i) lie in the parameter space P deﬁned in
1.11 [GMT]. It cannot lie in one of the 7 exceptional regions g iven in T able 1.2
[GMT], or else by Chapter 3 [GMT], [JR], [Li] and [CLLM], it an d (Li,D i,R i) correspond to a closed hyperbolic 3-manifold for i sufﬁciently large, for it is shown
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 29
in these papers that a neighborhood of each exceptional regi on corresponds to a
unique closed hyperbolic 3-manifold as conjectured in 1.31 [GMT]. This implies
thatN is covered by a closed 3-manifold, which is a contradiction.
The proof of Proposition 1.28 [GMT] shows that if (L,D,R ) does not lie in an
exceptional region, then there exists a killer word u(f,w ) inf andw as deﬁned in
1.18 [GMT]. This means that length(u(f,w )) < length(f ) or if A = axis(f ), then
d(A,u (f,w )A) < Re(D) = d(A,w (A)). Therefore, for i sufﬁciently large either
length(u(fi,w i)) < length(fi) or d(Ai,u (fi,w i)Ai) < Re(Di). The latter cannot
happen sincewi was chosen to take Ai to a nearest translate.
Since the nonexceptional points of P are covered by ﬁnitely many compact regions and each region has a killer word, it follows that for co rrect choice of killer
word, reduction of length is uniformly bounded below by some constantǫ.
Since π1(N ) has no parabolics, u(fi,w i) corresponds to a hyperbolic element
and hence a geodesic σi ⊂ N . If u(f,w ) is loxodromic, then the corresponding
geodesic ˜σ ⊂ H3 is of bounded distance from A. Therefore, for all i, d(σi,A i) is
uniformly bounded and hence{σi} exitsE. Thus, asymptotic length≤ l− ǫ which
is a contradiction. If u(f,w ) is parabolic, then length(σi)→ 0,{σi} exits the same
end as {γi} and hence asymptotic length equals zero. T o see that {σi} exitsE,
note that in H3,u (f,w ) takes a point x to y where d(x,y ) < l/ 4 and hence for i
sufﬁciently large there are essential closed curves of leng th< l/ 4 passing within
2d(x,A ) fromγi. □
Question 3.5. What is the maximal lower bound for the asymptotic tube radiu s of a
geometrically inﬁnite end E of a complete, orientable, hyperbolic manifold with ﬁnitel y
generated fundamental group, both in the cases that E is parabolic free or not?
Question 3.6. What is the upper bound for asymptotic length of a geometrica lly inﬁnite
endE? It follows from Theorem 0.9 that there is an upper bound whic h is a function of
rank(π1(E)).
4. C ANARY ’ S THEOREM
In this section we give a proof of Canary’s theorem (Theorem 4 .1) when N is
parabolic free. Our proof of Theorem 0.9 will closely parall el this argument.
Theorem 4.1 (Canary). IfE is a topologically tame end of the complete, orientable, hyperbolic 3-manifold N = H3/ Γ, where Γ has no parabolic elements, then either E is geometrically ﬁnite or there exists a sequence of CAT (− 1) surfaces exiting the end. If E is
parametrized byS× [0,∞ ), then these surfaces are homotopic to surfaces of the form S× t,
via a homotopy supported in S× [0,∞ ).
Proof. It sufﬁces to consider the case that E is geometrically inﬁnite. By Proposition 3.2 there exists a sequence of pairwise disjoint η-separated simple closed
geodesics ∆ = {δi} exitingE. Assume that ∆ and the parametrization of E are
chosen so that for all i∈ N, δ i⊂ S× (i− 1,i ). Let g=genus(S), ∆i ={δ1,···,δ i}
and let{α i} be a locally ﬁnite collection of embedded proper rays in E such that
∂α i∈ δi.
An idea used repeatedly , in various guises, throughout this paper is the following. If R is a closed oriented surface and T is obtained by shrinkwrapping R rel
the geodesics ∆R, then R is homotopic to T via a homotopy which does not meet
∆R, except possibly at the last instant. Therefore, if δi ⊂ ∆R and⟨R,α i⟩ = 1 ,
30 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
thenT∩ α i̸=∅ and if T∩ δi =∅, then⟨T,α i⟩ = 1 . Here ⟨·,·⟩denotes algebraic
intersection number.
Warm up Case. EachS× i is 2-incompressible in N\∆. (E.g. N =S× R)
Proof. Apply Theorem 0.8 to shrinkwrap S× i rel. ∆i+1 to a CAT (− 1) surface
Si. Since⟨S× i,α i⟩ = 1 ,Si∩ α i̸=∅. Since{α i} is locally ﬁnite, the Bounded Diameter Lemma implies that the Si’s must exit E. Therefore for i sufﬁciently large
Si⊂E and⟨Si,α 1⟩ = 1 ; and hence the projection of Si intoS× 0, (given by the
product structure on E) is a degree-1 map between surfaces of the same genus.
Since such maps are homotopic to homeomorphisms, we see that Si can be homotoped withinE to a homeomorphism onto S× 0. See Figure 4 for a schematic
view . □
N
N
E
E
S × 0 S × 1 S × 2 S × n
S1
S2
Sn
Q: how can one ﬁnd an exiting sequence of CAT (−1) surfaces?
A: shrinkwrap!
FIGURE 4. A schematic depiction of shrinkwrapping in action
General Case. (E.g.N is an open handlebody .)
Proof. Without loss of generality we can assume that every closed or ientable surface separates N , (see Lemma 5.1 and Lemma 5.6). W e use a purely combinatorial/topological argument to ﬁnd a particular sequence of s mooth surfaces exiting
E. W e then shrinkwrap these surfaces and show that they have th e desired escaping and homological properties.
Fixi. If possible, compress S× i, via a compression which either misses ∆ or
crosses ∆ once say atδi1⊂ ∆i. If possible, compress again via a compression meeting ∆\δi1 at most once say atδi2⊂ ∆i. After at mostn≤ 2g− 2 such operations and
deleting 2-spheres we obtain embedded connected surfaces Si
1,···,S i
ir , none of
which is a 2–sphere and each of which is 2–incompressible rel ∆i+1\{δi1∪···∪δin}.
For each ﬁxed i, eachδj (j≤ i) with at most 2g− 2 exceptions is separated fromE
by exactly one surface Si
k. Call Bagi
k the region separated fromE bySi
k. Note that
all compressions in the passage of Si to{Si
1,···,S i
ir} are on the nonE-side.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 31
Since each ir ≤ g, we can ﬁnd a p ∈ N and for each i, a reordering of the
Si
j’s (and their bags) so that for inﬁnitely many i≥ p,δp∈ Bagi
1; furthermore, if
for each i such that δp ∈ Bagi
1, we denote by p(i) the maximal index such that
δp(i) ∈ Bagi
1, then the set {p(i)} is unbounded. By Theorem 0.8, Si
1 is homotopic rel ∆i+1\{δi1,···,δ in} to a CAT (− 1) surfaceSi. Since the collection {α p(i)}
is inﬁnite and locally ﬁnite, the Bounded Diameter Lemma imp lies that a subsequence of these Si
1’s must exit E. Call this subsequence T1,T 2,···, whereTi is the
shrinkwrappedSni
1 . Therefore, fori sufﬁciently large,Ti must lie inS× (p,∞ ) and
⟨Ti,α p⟩ =⟨Sni
1 ,α p,⟩ = 1 . Therefore, projection of Ti toS× p is degree 1. This in
turn implies that genus Ti =g andTi can be homotoped withinE to a homeomorphism ontoS× 0. See Figure 5 for another schematic view . □
Remark 4.2. This argument shows that for i sufﬁciently large,S× i is already 2–
incompressible inN\∆i. Also, given anyη-separated collection of exiting geodesics
a sufﬁciently large ﬁnite subset is 2-disc busting. Actuall y using the technology of
the last chapter, this statement holds for any sequence of ex iting closed geodesics.
The proof of Theorem 0.9 follows a similar strategy . Here is t he outline in the
case thatN has a single endE and no parabolics. Given a sequence of η-separated
exiting simple closed geodesics ∆ = {δi} we pass to subsequence (and possibly
choose δ1 to have ﬁnitely many components) and ﬁnd a sequence of connec ted
embedded surfaces denoted{∂W i} such that for each i, ∂W i separates ∆i =δ1∪
δ2∪···∪ δi from ∆− ∆i and is 2-incompressible rel ∆i. It is a priori possible that
the∂W i’s do not exit E. If Wi denotes the compact region split off by ∂W i, then
after possibly deleting an initial ﬁnite set of Wi’s (and adding the associated δi’s to
δ1) we ﬁnd a compact 3-manifold D⊂ W1 which is a core forW =∪Wi.
W e next ﬁnd an immersed genus≤ g surfaceTi, which homologically separates
off a subset Bi of ∆i fromE. For inﬁnitely many i,Bi includes a ﬁxed δp and for
thesei’s the set {p(i)} is unbounded, where p(i) is the largest index of a δk⊂ Bi.
The surface Ti separatesBi from the rest in the sense that Ti lifts to an embedded
surface ˆTi in the π1(D)-cover ˆWi of Wi and in that cover ˆTi separates a lift ˆBi
from∂ ˆWi, the preimage of ∂W i. The argument to this point is purely topological
and applies to any 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundam ental group. In the
general case,{∂W i} will not be an exiting sequence.
Next we shrinkwrap ∂W i rel ∆i+1 to a CAT(− 1) surface which we continue to
call ∂W i. Then we homotop ˆTi rel ˆ∆i to a CAT (− 1) surface in the induced ˆWi
and let Ti denote the projection of Ti to N . The point of shrinkwrapping ∂W i
is that ∂ ˆWi is now a barrier which prevents ˆTi from popping out of ˆWi during
the subsequent shrinkwrapping (compare with §2). W e use the δp(i)’s to show
that, after passing to a subsequence, the Ti’s exit E. W e use δp to show that for i
sufﬁciently large,Ti homologically separatesE from a Scott core of N .
W e have outlined the strategy . For purposes of exposition, t he construction of
theTi’s in §6 is slightly different from the sketch above.
In§7 we make the necessary embellishments to handle the parabol ic case.
The next chapter develops the theory of end reductions which enables us to
deﬁne the submanifolds Wi.
32 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Core of N
S × 0 S × i
δp δp(i)
δi+1
αp
αp(i)
0 and 1 compress S × i to get the Si
j
Si
1
Si
2
Si
3
Bagi
1
Bagi
2
Bagi
3
Ti
Ti
Shrinkwrap Si
1 to get T i
Actual picture
FIGURE 5. The Bounded Diameter Lemma and the intersection
number argument show that S× i undergoes no compression,
andTi actually separates all of ∆i fromE.
5. E ND MANIFOLDS AND END REDUCTIONS
In this section, we prove a structure theorem for the topolog y of an end of a
3–manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. A refe rence for basic 3–
manifold topology is [He].
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 33
The ﬁrst step is to replace our original manifold with a 1–ended manifold M
with the homotopy type of a bouquet of circles and closed orie ntable surfaces. W e
then prove Theorem 5.21, the inﬁnite end engulﬁng theorem, which says that given an
exiting seqence of homotopically non trivial simple closed curves we can pass to
a subsequence Γ and ﬁnd a submanifold W, with ﬁnitely generated fundamental
group, containing Γ which has the following properties:
(1)W can be exhausted by codimension 0 compact submanifolds Wi whose
boundaries are 2–incompressible rel Γ∩ Wi.
(2)W has a core which lies in W1.
This completes the preliminary step in the proof of Theorem 0 .9, as explained
at the end of§4. The proof of Theorem 0.9 itself is in §6.
In what follows we will assume that all 3-manifolds are orien table and irreducible.
Lemma 5.1. IfE is an end of an open Riemannian 3-manifold M ′ with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, thenE is isometric to the end of a 1-ended 3-manifold M whose
(possibly empty) boundary is a ﬁnite union of closed orienta ble surfaces. A core of M is
obtained by attaching 1-handles to the components of ∂M , unless∂M =∅, in which case
a core is a 1-complex and M =M ′.
Proof. A thickened Scott coreC [Sc] ofM ′ is a union of 1-handles (possibly empty)
attached to a compact 3-manifoldX with incompressible boundary . SplitM ′ along
all the boundary components of X and let M be the component which contains
E. □
Remark 5.2. M is a submanifold of M ′.M is isometric to a submanifold ˆM of the
covering ofM ′ corresponding to the inclusionπ1(M )→ π1(M ′), and the inclusion
M→ ˆM is a homotopy equivalence.
Deﬁnition 5.3. Call a ﬁnitely generated group a free/surface group if it is a free product of orientable surface groups and a free group. Call a 1-en ded, irreducible, orientable, 3-manifoldM an end–manifold if it has a compact (possibly empty) boundary and a compact core of the form ∂M× I∪ 1-handles if∂M̸=∅ or a handlebody
if∂M =∅.
Note thatπ1(M ) is a free/surface group for M an end–manifold.
Lemma 5.4. If G is a subgroup of a free/surface group, then its π1-rank equals its H1rank, both in Z and Z/ 2Z-coeﬁcients. □
Proof. A ﬁnitely generated subgroup of a free/surface group is a fre e/surface
group, and equality holds in that case. An inﬁnitely generat ed subgroup of a
free/surface group contains an inﬁnitely generated free su mmand. Consequently ,
bothπ1 andH1 rank are inﬁnite for such subgroups. □
Lemma 5.5. AnH1-injective subgroupG of a free/surface group K is ﬁnitely generated.
Proof. Rankπ1(G) = rank(G/ [G,G ])≤ rank(K/ [K,K ]) = rankπ1(K)<∞ . □
Lemma 5.6. A 1-ended, orientable, irreducible 3-manifold M with compact boundary is
an end-manifold if and only if π1(M ) is a free/surface group, H2(M,∂M ) = 0 and∂M
isπ1-injective.
Every closed embedded π1-injective surface in an end-manifold is boundary parallel .
34 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Proof. LetM be an end-manifold with core C of the form ∂M× I∪ 1-handles or
handlebody if ∂M =∅. Since the inclusion C→ M is a homotopy equivalence,
∂M is incompressible and π1(M ) is a free/surface group. If T⊂ M is a compact
properly embedded π1-injective surface, then T can be homotoped rel ∂T intoC.
The cocores Di of the 1-handles are properly embedded disks whose boundary
misses ∂T . Since T is homotopically essential, it follows that each intersect ion
T∩ Di is homotopically inessential in T , and therefore T can be homotoped off
the cocores of the 1–handles. Once this is done, T can be further homotoped rel.
boundary into ∂M , since C deformation retracts to ∂M in the complement of the
cocores of the 1–handles. This implies that H2(M,∂M ) = 0 .
IfH2(M,∂M ) = 0 andM has incompressible boundary , a connected, closed orientable incompressible surface R must separate off a connected, compact Haken
manifoldX with incompressible boundary . Ifπ1(M ) is also a free/surface group,
then π1(X) is a closed orientable surface group and using [St] we conclu de that
X =N (T ) for some component T of∂M , so R is boundary parallel. Therefore, if
∂M =∅, then any core is a handlebody . If ∂M ̸=∅, then M has a core C which
contains∂M [Mc]. If C′ is obtained by maximally compressing C, then each component of∂C ′ is boundary parallel and hence C =∂M× I∪ 1-handles. □
Corollary 5.7. IfW is a 1-ended, π1-injective submanifold of the end-manifold M such
thatπ1(W) is ﬁnitely generated and ∂W is a union of components of ∂M , thenW is an
end-manifold.
Deﬁnition 5.8. Given a connected compact subset J of an open irreducible 3manifoldM , the end reductionWJ of J to M is to ﬁrst approximation the smallest open submanifold of M which can engulf, up to isotopy , any closed surface in
M\J which is incompressible in M\J. End reductions were introduced by BrinThickstun [BT1, BT2]. Their basic properties were develope d by Brin-Thickstun
[BT1, BT2] and Myers [My]. In particular [BT1] show that WJ can be created
via the following procedure. If V1 ⊂ V2 ⊂ ···is an exhaustion of M by compact connected codimension-0 submanifolds such that J ⊂ V1, then one inductively obtains an exhaustion W1 ⊂ W2 ⊂ ··· ofWJ by compact sets as follows. Transform V1 to W1 through a maximal series of intermediate manifolds
U1 =V1,U 2,···,U n =W1 whereUk+1 is obtained fromUk by one of the following
3 operations.
(1) Compress along a disc disjoint from J.
(2) Attach a 2-handle to Uk which lies inM\int(Uk), and whose attaching core
circle is essential in ∂U k.
(3) Delete a component of Uk disjoint fromJ.
Having constructed Wi, pass to a subsequence of the Vj ’s and reorder so that
Wi ⊂ int(Vi+1). Finally pass from Vi+1 to Wi+1 via a maximal sequence of the
above operations. Since ∂W i is incompressible inM− J, an essential compression
ofUk can be isotoped rel boundary to one missing Wi. Therefore, we will assume
such operations miss Wi and hence Wi ⊂ int(Wi+1). Brin and Thickstun [BT1]
show thatWJ is up to isotopy independent of all choices.
W e say that{Wi} is a standard exhaustion ofWJ ifW1⊂ W2⊂··· andWJ =
∪ iWi, where for eachi,Wi arises fromVi via a sequence of the three end-reduction
operations andV1⊂ V2⊂··· is an exhaustion of M by compact submanifolds.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 35
Remark 5.9. Note that operations (1) and (2) reduce the sum of the ranks of π1 of
the boundary components. It follows that the transition fro mVi toWi is obtained
by a ﬁnite sequence of operations.
Remark 5.10. (Historical Note) Brin and Thickstun [BT1], [BT2] study end reductions to develop a necessary and a sufﬁcient condition, end 1-movability, for taming
an end of a 3-manifold. More recently , Myers [My] has promote d the use of end
reductions to address both the R3-covering space conjecture and the Marden conjecture.
Lemma 5.11. The inclusion iJ :WJ→ N inducesπ1 andH1-injections. The latter in
both Z and Z/ 2Z homology.
Proof. Theπ1-injectivity was ﬁrst proven in [BT2] and rediscovered in [M y]. Our
proof ofH1-injectivity mimics the proof of π1-injectivity in [My]. Suppose C⊂ Wi
is a union of oriented simple closed curves bounding the surf aceS⊂ M . Note
that by elementary 3–manifold topology , we can assumeS is embedded.
By choosing n sufﬁciently large we can assume that Wi∪ S⊂ Vn. If V 1
n is obtained by adding a 2-handle to Vn, thenS⊂ V 1
n . If V 1
n is obtained by compressing
V1, via a compression missing J, then by modifying S near the compressing disc
we obtain a surface S1 spanningC (orientably , if need be) withS1⊂ V 1
n . If V 1
n is
obtained by deleting components of V1 which missC, thenS1 =S∩ V 1
n still spans
C. Since Wn is obtained from Vn by a ﬁnite sequence of such operations it follows
thatC bounds inWn and hence inWJ . □
H1-injectivity ofWJ inN gives us the following crucial corollary:
Corollary 5.12. An end-reduction in an end-manifold has ﬁnitely generated f undamental
group.
Proof. Combine Lemma 5.11 with Lemma 5.5. □
Deﬁnition 5.13. IfWJ is an end reduction of the codimension-0 submanifold J in
N , then we say thatWJ is trivial ifWJ is isotopic to an open regular neighborhood
of J or equivalentlyWJ is isotopic to int (J). WJ is eventually trivial if it has an
exhaustionW1⊂ W2⊂··· such that∂W i is parallel to ∂W j for alli,j .
W e now study end reductions of disconnected spaces J. While the following
technology and deﬁnitions can be given for more general obje cts we restrict our
attention to a ﬁnite unions of pairwise disjoint closed (pos sibly non simple) curves
none of which lie in a 3-cell. Ultimately we will address end r eductions of inﬁnite
sequences of exiting curves.
Deﬁnition 5.14. IfJ is a ﬁnite union of pairwise disjoint closed curves in an open
irreducible 3-manifold M , we say that J is end nonseparable if there is a compact
connected submanifoldH such thatJ⊂ int(H) and∂H is incompressible inM\J.
Such anH is called a house ofJ. If J is end nonseparable, then deﬁneWJ to be an
end-reduction ofH, and callWJ the end reduction of J.
Lemma 5.15. The end-reductionWJ of an end nonseparable union J of closed curves is
well deﬁned up to isotopy.
Proof. Let H and H ′ be two houses for J. W e want to show that if WH is an
end reduction of H, then there is an isotopy of H ′ toH ′
1 ﬁxingJ, so that the end
36 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
reductionWH′
1 ofH ′
1 is equal to WH . By the deﬁnition of a house for J, both H
and H ′
1 satisfy the property that they are connected submanifolds o f M whose
boundaries are incompressible in M\J.
Let{Wi} be a standard exhaustion of WH arising from the exhaustion {Vi} of
M . By passing to a subsequence we can assume that H ′∪ H⊂ V2. By considering
the passage of V2 to W2, we observe that H ′ can be isotoped to H ′
1 rel J to lie
in int (W2) and that ∂W 2 is incompressible in M\H ′
1. Thus WH is also an endreduction ofH ′. Since end reductions are unique up to isotopy the result fol lows,
and we may unambiguously denoteWH byWJ . □
Lemma 5.16. Let A be a ﬁnite union of pairwise disjoint closed curves in the ope n irreducible 3-manifold M . Then A canonically decomposes into ﬁnitely many maximal
pairwise disjoint end nonseparable subsets A1,···,A n. Indeed, if B is a maximal end
nonseparable subset of A, thenB =Ai for somei.
Proof. Since each element of A is end nonseparable, it sufﬁces to show that if B
andC are end nonseparable subsets of A, then either C∪ B is end nonseparable
orC∩ B =∅. Let HB andHC be houses for B andC respectively . LetV ⊂ N be a
compact submanifold containingHB∪ HC . By considering the passage of V toW
by a maximal sequence of compressions, 2-handle additions, and deletions which
are taken with respect to B∪ C, one sees that HB (resp. HC ) can be isotoped to
lie in W via an isotopy ﬁxing B (resp. C). If B∩ C̸=∅, then W is connected and
hence is a house for B∪ C. □
Lemma 5.17. IfA1,···An are the maximal end nonseparable components of a ﬁnite set
A of pairwise disjoint closed curves in an open irreducible 3- manifoldM , then they have
pairwise disjoint end reductions. In particular they have p airwise disjoint houses.
Proof. LetA1,A 2,···,A n be the maximal end nonseparable subsets of A. Let{Vk}
be an exhaustion of M withA⊂ V1. Consider a sequence V1 = U1,···,U n = W1
where the passage from one to the next is isotopy , compression, 2-handle addition
or deletion, where the compressions or deletions are taken w ith respect to A. By
passing to a subsequence of the exhaustion we can assume that W1⊂ V2, and in
the above manner pass from V2 toW2. In like manner construct W3,W 4,···. By
deleting ﬁnitely many of the ﬁrst Wi’s from the sequence and reindexing, we can
assume that all the Wi’s have the same number of components.
It sufﬁces to show that if W is a component of Wk, then W contains a unique
Ai and that ∂W is incompressible in M\Ai. Indeed, it sufﬁces to prove incompressibility of ∂W in M\(W∩ A), for then W is a house and can only contain
oneAi by maximality . If ∂W is compressible in M\(W∩ A) it must compress to
the outside via some compressing disc D. Consider a term Vn in the exhausting
sequence with Wk∪ D⊂ Vn. By considering the passage of Vn toWn we can rechoose the disc spanning ∂D to obtain a new compressing disc E ⊂ Wn. Since
∂W is incompressible inM\int(Wk), it follows thatE must hit a component of Wk
distinct fromW . This imples that Wn contains fewer components than Wk, which
is a contradiction. □
Lemma 5.18. IfA1,A 2,···,A n are as in Lemma 5.17, with pairwise disjoint end reductionsWA1,WA2,···,WAn, thenWA1∪W A2∪···∪W An isH1-injective inM , in both
Z and Z/ 2Z coefﬁcients.
Proof. Repeat the proof of Lemma 5.11. □
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 37
Corollary 5.19. LetA be a union of ﬁnitely many pairwise disjoint closed curves in the
end-manifoldM . If each component of A is homotopically nontrivial, then A breaks up
into at most rank (π1(M )) maximal non separable subsets.
Proof. IfA partitions into maximal non separable subsets A1,···,A n, then theH1rank ofWAi is non trivial, sinceπ1(WAi ) is a nontrivial subgroup of a free/surface
group. Now apply the previous lemma. □
Lemma 5.20. Letγ1,γ 2,··· be a sequence of homotopically nontrivial, pairwise disjoi nt
closed curves in the end-manifold M . Then we can group together ﬁnitely many of the
curves intoγ1, and pass to a subsequence so that
(1) Any ﬁnite subset of{γ1,γ 2,···}which containsγ1 is end nonseparable.
(2) Each component ofγ1, and eachγi,i≥ 2 represent the same element ofH1(M, Z/ 2Z).
Proof. By passing to a subsequence we can assume that eachγi represents the same
element ofH1(M, Z/ 2Z). By Lemma 5.16, if T is a ﬁnite subset of Γ, thenT canonically partitions into ﬁnitely many end nonseparable subse tsS1,···,S n with corresponding pairwise disjoint end reductionsW1,···,Wn. Deﬁne
C(T ) =
n∑
i=1
rank(H1(Wi, Z/ 2Z)) = rank(H1(∪ n
i=1Wi, Z/ 2Z))≤ rank(H1(M, Z/ 2Z))
where the last inequality follows from Lemma 5.18. Deﬁne
C(Γ) = max{C(T )|T is a ﬁnite subset of Γ}
Now pass to an inﬁnite subset of Γ withC(Γ) minimal. By Lemma 5.18, if T⊂ Γ
withC(T ) = C(Γ), then adding a new element to the T does not increase the number of end nonseparable subsets in its canonical partition. SinceC(Γ) is minimal,
we can enlarge T by adding ﬁnitely many elements so that the enlarged T , which
by abuse of notation we still call T , is end nonseparable. Again by maximality
of C(T ), T together with any ﬁnite subset of Γ is still end non separable. Now
express Γ as∪γi withγ1 =T . □
Theorem 5.21 (Inﬁnite end engulﬁng theorem) . If γ1,γ 2,··· is a locally ﬁnite sequence of pairwise disjoint, homotopically non trivial, cl osed curves in the end-manifold
M , then after passing to a subsequence, allowing γ1 to have multiple components and ﬁxing a base point x∈ γ1, there exist compact submanifolds D⊂ W1⊂ W2⊂··· ofM
such that
(1) ∂W i∩ ∂M is a union of components of ∂M and∂W i− ∂M is connected.
(2) If Γi =∪ i
j=1γj, then Γi⊂ Wi, and Γi can be homotoped into D via a homotopy
supported inWi.
(3) ∂W i is 2-incompressible rel Γi.
(4) IfW =∪Wi, thenW isπ1 andH1–injective in both Z and Z/ 2Z coeﬁcients.
(5) D is a core ofW and is of the form ∂W× I∪ 1-handles.
The conclusion of this theorem is schematically depicted in Figure 6.
Proof. By passing to a subsequence and allowing γ1 to have multiple components
we can assume that Γ ={γi} satisﬁes the conclusions of Lemma 5.20. Assume that
γ1 has at least two elements.
LetW1 be an end reduction to γ1 with standard exhaustion W1, 1 ⊂ W1, 2 ⊂
···. Let D1 be a core for W1 with x ∈ D1. Since W1 is π1-injective in M , by
38 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
M
∂M
∂M
E
γ1
γ2
γn
W1
W2
Wn
FIGURE 6. A schematic view of {Wi},{γi} andM .
passing to a subsequence we can choose W1, 1 so that each component of γ1 can
be homotoped into D via a homotopy in W1, 1. Furthermore, H1-injectivity allows
us to assume that within W1, 1 each γ∈ γ1 is Z2-homologous to a component γ ′
of γ1 with γ ′̸= γ. If γ represents the trivial class, it should be homologically
trivial inW1, 1. Finally W1, 1 should be sufﬁciently large so that ∂W 1, 1 is a union of
components of ∂M and a single component disjoint from ∂M . Note that ∂W 1, 1 is
2-incompressible relγ1. Indeed, by construction ∂W 1, 1 is incompressible in M/γ 1,
hence∂W 1, 1 is incompressible to the outside and any essential compress ing disc
D forW1, 1 must intersect γ1 at least once. If D meets the component γ ofγ1, then
sinceγ is either Z2-homologically trivial in W1, 1 or Z2-homologous to a γ ′̸= γ it
follows that|D∩ γ1|≥ 2.
By passing to a subsequence of {γi} we can assume that γ2∩ W1, 1 =∅. By
Lemma 5.20, Γ2 ={γ1,γ 2} is end nonseparable. LetW2 be an end reduction for Γ2
with standard exhaustion W2, 2⊂ W2, 3⊂ W2, 4⊂··· whereW1, 1⊂ int(W2, 2). As
above letD2 be a core forW2 withx∈ D2 and by choosing W2, 2 sufﬁciently large
we can assume that it supports a homotopy of Γ2 intoD2 as well as homologies
between elements of Γ2. Finally , ∂W2, 2 is a union of components of ∂M and a
single component disjoint from ∂M . As above, ∂W2, 2 is 2-incompressible rel Γ2.
Having inductively constructed Γi− 1,W i− 1,i − 1 andDi− 1 pass to a subsequence
of{γj} so that Γi− 1 ⊂ Γi ={γ1,···,γ i} with γi∩ Wi− 1,i − 1 =∅. Let Wi be an
end reduction of Γi with standard exhaustionWi,i ⊂ Wi,i +1⊂ Wi,i +2⊂··· where
Wi− 1,i − 1⊂ int(Wi,i ). Let Di be a core of Wi, but if possible let Di = Di− 1. Finally Wi,i should be chosen sufﬁciently large to support homotopies of Γi into
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 39
Di and homologies as described in the previous paragraphs and s o that ∂W i,i is
a union of components of ∂M and a single other component. As above ∂W i,i is
2-incompressible rel Γi.
LetW =∪ iWi,i . The proof of Lemma 5.11 shows that W isπ1 andH1-injective
in M in Z and Z2 coeﬁcients. By Lemma 5.5W has ﬁnitely generated fundamental
group and hence for some n, the inclusion Wn,n →W isπ1-surjective. Since Dn
andWn,n have the same π1-image in π1(Wn) and hence in π1(M ), they have the
same image in π1(W) and hence Dn→W is π1-surjective. Since the inclusions
Dn→W n→ M areπ1-injective it follows that Dn is also π1-injective inW and
hence is a core of W. Therefore, if m≥ n, then Dn andWm,m have the same π1image inπ1(W) and hence in π1(M ). Since theWm isπ1-injective inM , it follows
thatDm andDn have the same image in π1(Wm) and henceDn is a core ofWm for
allm≥ n.
T o complete the proof of the Theorem reorganize{γi} so thatγ1 is now the old
{γ1,γ 2,···,γ n}, and for all i∈ N, γ1+i = oldγn+i. Let D =Dn. Finally , fori∈ N,
letWi =Wn+i− 1,n +i− 1.
By Corollary 5.6 each Wi is an end-manifold and hence D could have been
taken to be of the form N (∂W)× I∪ 1-handles, if ∂W ̸=∅ and a handlebody
otherwise. □
Deﬁnition 5.22. Call theW constructed in Theorem 5.21 an end-engulﬁng of Γ.
The material in the rest of this chapter will not be used elsew here in this paper;
in particular, it is not used to prove any of the results of §0.
Lemma 5.23. IfJ ⊂ J ′ are ﬁnite, end nonseparable unions of homotopically essent ial,
pairwise disjoint, closed curves with end-reductions W andW ′, thenW is isotopic rel J
toW1, whereW1⊂W ′.
Proof. LetW1⊂ W2⊂··· be a standard exhaustion of W. Let Z1⊂ Z2⊂··· be
a standard exhaustion of W ′ arising from the exhaustion {Vi} of M . By passing
to subsequence we can assume that W1⊂ V1. By considering the passage of V1 to
Z1 we can isotope W1 relJ to lie in Z1. Proceeding by induction and passing to
subsequence, we can assume that Wk⊂ Vk andWk− 1⊂ Zk− 1. By considering the
passage of Vk toZk (which ﬁxes Zk− 1) we can isotope Wk relWk− 1 to lie in Zk.
The isotopedWi’s give rise to an isotopy of W toW1 withW1⊂W ′. □
Remark 5.24. Given J ⊂ J ′ with end-reductions W andW ′ one can isotope
W relJ toW1 so that W1 ⊂ W′ (Lemma 5.23). On the other hand one cannot
in general isotopeW ′ to containW. One need only look at the case of J⊂ J ′ being nested balls in the Whitehead manifold to ﬁnd examples. S uch considerations
make it challenging to ﬁnd nested end–reductions W1⊂W 2⊂W 3⊂··· .
Theorem 5.25 (Finite end reduction theorem). LetM be an end-manifold. If Γ ={γi}
is an end nonseparable union of ﬁnitely many homotopically e ssential, pairwise disjoint,
closed curves, then an end reduction WΓ of Γ has ﬁnitely generated fundamental group
and given a standard exhaustion{Wi}, by passing to a subsequence, for all i,j <k,
in∗ (π1(Wi)) = in∗ (π1(Wj ))⊂ π1(Wk)
and the map in ∗ :π1(Wk)→ π1(WΓ) restricted to in ∗ (π1(Wi)) induces an isomorphism
ontoπ1(WΓ). Here in ∗ denotes the map induced by inclusion.
W e ﬁrst prove a topological lemma.
40 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Lemma 5.26. IfM is an end-manifold, then M has an exhaustion by compact manifolds
V1⊂ V2⊂··· , such that for each i> 1 eitherVi is a handlebody, in which case ∂M =∅,
orVi is obtained by attaching 1-handles to a N (∂M ).
Proof. If∂M =∅, then π1(M ) is free and this result follows directly from [FF]. If
∂M̸=∅, it sufﬁces to show that ifX is any compact submanifold ofM , thenX⊂ V
whereV is obtained by thickening ∂M and attaching 1-handles. W e use the standard argument, e.g. see [BF], [BT2] or [FF]. Using the loop th eorem we can pass
fromX to a submanifoldY , with incompressible boundary via a sequence of compressions and external 2-handle additions. By appropriate ly enlarging X to X1,
so as to contain these 2-handles, we can pass from X1 toY by only compressions.
By enlargingY , and hence X1, we can assume that ∂M⊂ Y and no component of
M\int(Y ) is compact. By Lemma 5.6 each component of ∂Y is boundary parallel
and henceY is of the form N (∂M )∪ 1-handles. □
Proof of Theorem 5.25 . Let V1⊂ V2⊂··· be an exhaustion of M as in Lemma 5.26
so that Γ⊂ V1. Let W1⊂ W2⊂··· be a standard exhaustion of WΓ arising from
the exhaustion{Vi} ofM .
By Deﬁnition 5.14 and Lemma 5.12, π1(WΓ) is ﬁnitely generated, so we can
pass to a subsequence and assume that the induced map π1(W1) → π1(WΓ) is
surjective.
LetHi = in∗ (π1(W1)) where in :W1→ Wi is inclusion. W e now show that after
passing to a subsequence of the W ′
is,i ≥ 2, the induced maps
H2→ H3→···→ π1(WΓ)
are all isomorphisms.
Forj≥ 1, let Gj = α j
∗ (π1(W1)), where α j : W1→ Vj is inclusion. Each Gj is a
ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(Vj ) and hence is a free product of ﬁnitely many
closed orientable surface groups and a ﬁnitely generated fr ee group. Since for all
j, rank(Gj )≤ rank(G1), there are only ﬁnitely many possibilities for such groups
and hence by passing to a subsequence we can assume that for j,k > 1, the groups
Gj and Gk are abstractly isomorphic. Free/surface groups are obviou sly linear,
hence residually ﬁnite by Malcev [Mv]. Further, Malcev [Mv] went on to show that
ﬁnitely generated residually ﬁnite groups are Hopﬁan, i.e. surjective self maps are
isomorphisms. This implies that the induced maps G2→ G3→ G4→··· are all
isomorphisms. If
K = ker(in∗ :π1(W1)→ π1(WΓ))
then
K = ker(π1(W1)→ π1(M )) = ker(π1(W1)→ G2)
W e now show that K = ker( π1(W1) → π1(W2)). One readily checks that if
W1 ⊂ V and K = ker(π1(W1) → π1(V )), and V ′ is obtained from V by compression, 2-handle addition or deletion where these operat ions are performed in
the complement of W1, then K ⊂ ker(π1(W1) → π1(V ′)). This implies that if
K2 = ker(π1(W1)→ π1(W2)), then K ⊂ K2. On the other hand K2⊂ K since
K = ker(π1(W1)→ π1(WΓ)). Therefore, the induced maps H2→ H3→ π1(WΓ)
are isomorphisms.
Apply the argument of the previous paragraph to obtain a subsequence of{Wi}
which starts withW1 andW2 such that the π1-image ofW2 inWj,j > 2, maps isomorphically toπ1(WΓ), via the map induced by inclusion. Continue in this manner
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 41
to constructW3,W 4,···. □
Addendum to Theorem 5.21 We can obtain the following additional property. If i,j <
k, then
in∗ (π1(Wi)) = in∗ (π1(Wj))⊂ π1(Wk)
where in denotes inclusion. The map in∗ : π1(Wk)→ π1(W) restricted to in∗ (π1(Wi))
induces an isomorphism onto π1(W).
Proof. Apply Theorem 5.21 to produce the space D as well as the sets {γi},{Γi},
{Wi} which we now relabel as {γ ′
i},{Γ′
i},{W ′
i}. Deﬁne γ1 = Γ 1 = γ ′
1,W1 = W ′
1,
γ2 = γ ′
2 and Γ2 = Γ ′
2. Let W ′
2 = W 1
2 ⊂ W 2
2 ⊂ W 3
2 ⊂··· be a standard exhaustion
of an end reduction W2 of Γ2, which we can assume satisﬁes the conclusions of
Theorem 5.25. Deﬁning W2 = W 2
2 , we see that the restriction of in ∗ : π1(W2)→
π1(W2) = π1(D) to in ∗ (π1(W1))⊂ π1(W2) is an isomorphism. Choose γ3 = γ ′
i3∈
{γ ′
i} so that γ3∩ W2 = ∅ and deﬁne Γ3 = Γ 2∪ γ3. Let W 1
3 ⊂ W 2
3 ⊂ W 3
3 ⊂
··· be a standard exhaustion of an end-reduction W3 of Γ3 which satisﬁes the
conclusions of Theorem 5.25 and has W2⊂ W 1
3 . Deﬁning W3 = W 2
3 , we see that
the restriction of in ∗ : π1(W3)→ π1(W3) = π1(D) to in ∗ (π1(W2))⊂ π1(W3) is
an isomorphism. Now deﬁne γ3 = γ ′
i3 and Γ2 = Γ 1∪ γi3 . In a similar manner
constructγ4,γ 5···, Γ4, Γ5,···, W4,W 5,···and ﬁnally deﬁneW =∪Wi. □
Remarks 5.27. If one allows each γi to be a ﬁnite set of elements, then we can
obtain the conclusion (in Theorem 5.21 and its addendum) tha t each γi is Z/ 2Zhomologically trivial.
Question 5.28. LetM be a connected, compact, orientable, irreducible 3-manifo ld such
that χ (M )̸= 0 and let G be a subgroup of π1(M ). If the induced map G/ [G,G ]→
H1(M ) is injective, is G ﬁnitely generated?
Question 5.29. Let Γ be a locally ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint homotopi cally essential closed curves such that C(Γ) = C(Γ′) for any inﬁnite subset Γ′ of Γ. Is it true,
that given n∈ N, there exists an end-engulﬁng of W =∪Wi of Γ such that for all i,
|E∩ Γi|≥ n for all essential compressing discs E ofWi?
6. P ROOF OF THEOREMS 0.9, 0.4 AND 0.2: P ARABOLIC FREE CASE
Proof of Theorem 0.9. By Lemma 5.1 and Remark 5.2 it sufﬁces to consider the
case thatE is the end of an end-manifold M⊂ N such that the inclusion M→ N
is a homotopy equivalence. By Lemma 3.2 there exists an η-separated collection
∆ ={δi} of closed geodesics which exitE. W e let∆i denote the union ∆i =∪ j≤ iδj.
Apply Theorem 5.21 to ∆ and M to pass to a subsequence also called ∆ where
we allow δ1 to have ﬁnitely many components. Theorem 5.21 also produces a
manifoldW open in M and exhausted by compact manifolds {Wi} having the
following properties.
(1)W isπ1 andH1 injective (in Z and Z/ 2Z coeﬁcients) inM and henceπ1(W)
is a free/surface group.
(2) ∂W i\∂M is a closed connected surface which separates ∆i fromE and is
2-incompressible inN rel. ∆i.
(3) There exists a compact submanifold core D⊂ W1 ofW such that for each
i, δi can be homotoped intoD via a homotopy supported inWi.D is either
42 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
of the form ∂W× I with 1-handles attached to the 1-side, if ∂W̸ =∅ or a
handlebody , otherwise.
Let Gi denote in ∗ (π1(D))⊂ π1(Wi). Let ∂eD denote D∩ ∂M = ∂W. Let Xi
denote the covering space of Wi with groupGi and let ˆD denote the lift of D. Pick
a homotopy of ∆i into D supported in Wi. This homotopy lifts to a homotopy
of ˆ∆i into ˆD, thereby picking out the closed preimages ˆ∆i of ∆i which are in 1-1
correspondence with ∆i. Let{ˆδ1,···, ˆδi} denote these elements.
Claim. EachWi is a compact atoroidal Haken manifold and ∂W i contains a surface
of genus≥ 2.
Proof of Claim. Each embedded torus in N is compressible, since N is parabolic
free. A compressible torus in an irreducible 3-manifold is e ither a tube, i.e. bounds
a solid torus or a convolutube, i.e. bounds a cube with knotted hole X, which is a
3-ball with an open regular neighborhood of a properly embed ded arc removed.
Furthermore,X lies in a 3-ball. Therefore, if some component of ∂W i is a torus,
Wi is either a solid torus or a cube with knotted hole. The former can contain at
most one closed geodesic and the latter none. Since Wi contains at least two closed
geodesics∂W i cannot contain a torus.
IfWi contained an embedded incompressible torus T , then the compact region
bounded by T would lie in Wi. This implies that T is a convolutube. In H3, the
universal covering of N , let ˜∆i denote the preimage of ∆i and ˜Wi the preimage of
Wi. Since T lies in a 3-cell in N ,T lifts to a torus ˜T isometric to T . Using the loop
theorem, it follows that ˜∂W i is incompressible in H3\˜∆i and ˜T is incompressible
in ˜Wi. W e will show that after an isotopy of ˜T supported in ˜Wi, there exists an
embedded 3-ball F ⊂ H3 such that T ⊂ F and F∩ ˜∆i =∅. This implies that
T is compressible in F , via a compressing disc D disjoint from ˜∆i. Since ˜Wi is
incompressible in H3\˜∆i it follows that D can be isotoped rel ∂D so thatD⊂ ˜Wi.
This contradicts the fact that ˜T is incompressible in ˜Wi.
Here is how to ﬁnd F . Let E⊂ H3 be a large round ball transverse to ˜∆i which
contains ˜T in its interior. ˜∆i∩E ={α 1,···,α n} is a ﬁnite union of unknotted arcs,
i.e. there exists pairwise disjoint embedded discs {D1,···,D n} such that for each
k,D k⊂ E and∂D k consists of α k together with an arc lying in ∂E . For each k,
eitherα k∩ ˜Wi =∅ orα k⊂ ˜Wi. Since ∂ ˜Wi is incompressible in H3\˜∆i,E and the
Dk’s can be isotoped, via an isotopy which ﬁxes ˜∆i pointwise, to E′ andD′
k’s so
thatE′ is a 3-ball containing ˜T , the D′
k’s are unknotting discs for the α k’s and for
eachk, eitherD′
k∩ ˜Wi =∅ orD′
k⊂ ˜Wi. After an isotopy of ˜T supported inE′∩ ˜Wi,
for each k, ˜T∩ D′
k =∅. Finally let F equalE′−∪ n
j=1int(N (D′
k)), where N (D′
k) is
a very small regular neighborhood of D′
k. □
It now follows from Thurston (see Proposition 3.2 [Ca] or [Mo ]) that int (Xi)
is topologically tame. Let ¯Xi denote its manifold compactiﬁcation. Since ∂eD
is a union of components of ∂W i and Xi is the π1(D) cover, there is a canonical
identiﬁcation of ∂eD with some set of components of ∂ ¯Xi. Let ∂e ˆD denote these
components. Having the same homotopy type as D, it follows by the usual group
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 43
theoretic reasons that ¯Xi either compresses down to a 3-ball, or to a possibly disconnected (closed orientable surface)×I. In the former case ¯Xi is a handlebody
which, for reasons of Euler characteristic, is of the same ge nus as D. In the latter
case, since ∂e ˆD is an incompressible surface, ¯Xi is topologically ∂e ˆD× I with 1handles attached to the 1-side. Let ¯Si denote∂ ¯Xi− ∂e ˆD. Again by reason of Euler
characteristic, genus( ¯Si) = genus(∂ED), where∂ED =∂D− ∂eD.
Deﬁneg′ = genus( ¯Si) = genus(∂ED). W e show thatg′≤ g = genus(∂EC), where
C is the original core of M . By construction D∩ ∂M is a union of components of
C∩ ∂M , therefore it sufﬁces to show that the number of 1-handles at tached to
N (D∩ ∂M ) is not more than the number of 1-handles attached to N (C∩ ∂M ) in
the constructions of D andC respectively . IfD∩ ∂M =C∩ ∂M , then this follows
immediately from the fact thatD andC are cores respectively ofW andM and the
H1-injectivity ofW inM . Let E = (C∩ ∂M )\(D∩ ∂M ). The H1-injectivity ofC in
M implies that the inclusionH1(C∩∂M )→ H1(M ) is injective. The H1-injectivity
ofD inW and theH1-injectivity ofW inM implies thatD isH1-injective inM . If
the kernel of in ∗ :H1(D∪ E)→ H1(M ) is nontrivial, then a non trivial homology
between D and E would lie in some Vj, where j > 1 and Vj is a term in the
exhausting sequence of M used for constructing {Wi}. Arguing as in the proof
of Lemma 5.11, Wj contains a non trivial homology between D andE and hence,
E∩ Wj̸=∅. This contradicts the fact that Wj∩ ∂M =D∩ ∂M . Therefore
(∗) number of 1-handles of D≤ rankH1(M )− (rankH1(D∩ ∂M ) + rankH1(E))
= rankH1(M )− rank(H1(∂C∩ M ))
= number of 1-handles of C
Isotope ¯Si⊂ ¯Xi to an embedded surface ˆSi⊂ Xi via an isotopy which does
not cross ˆ∆i. Next, if possible, compress ˆSi via a compression either disjoint from
ˆ∆i or crossing ˆ∆i once, say at ˆδi1 . If possible, compress the resulting surface via a
compression crossing ˆ∆i\ˆδi1 at most once and so on. Since genus( ˆSi) = g′, there
is an a priori upper bound on the number of compressions we need to do. In the
end we obtain connected surfaces ˆSi
1,···, ˆSi
n inXi which are 2-incompressible rel
ˆ∆\{ˆδi1,···, ˆδim} where m < 2g′− 1, and both n and genus( ˆSi
j) are≤ g′. Since
Xi\ˆ∆i is irreducible, we can assume that no ˆSi
j is a 2-sphere. These ˆSi
j’s create a
partitionBi
1,···Bi
n of ˆ∆i\{ˆδi1,···, ˆδim}, whereBi
j is the subset of ˆ∆i\{ˆδi1,···, ˆδim}
separated from ¯Si by ˆSi
j. Each ˆSi
j is incompressible to the ¯Si side, since the component of ¯Xi split along ˆSi
1∪···∪ ˆSi
n which contains ¯Si is homeomorphic to
N ( ˆSi
1∪···∪ ˆSi
n)∪ 1-handles. Therefore, each ˆSi
j is 2-incompressible relBi
j.
As in the proof of Canary’s theorem, after appropriately reo rdering theBi
j’s we
can ﬁnd a p∈ N and a sequence k1 < k2 <··· such that ˆδp ⊂ Bki
1 and if p(i)
denotes the largest index of a ˆδj∈ Bki
1 , then limi→∞ p(i) =∞ . In general reorder
the ˆSi
j’s so that, if possible, ˆδp⊂ Bi
1.
44 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Fix i. Let W ′
i be the union of Wi together with the components of N\int(M )
which non trivially intersect ∂W 1. Let Yi denote the covering of W ′
i with fundamental groupGi. ViewXi, ˆ∆i, and the ˆSi
j’s etc. as sitting naturally in Yi. Let δ∈ ∆
be disjoint from Wi. Apply Lemma 2.3 to Wi, δ∪ ∆i andSi
1.
W e have the following dictionary between terms appearing inour current setup
(on the left) and the terms appearing in the hypothesis of Lem ma 2.3 (on the right):
the geodesicsδ∪ ∆i ←→ the geodesics ∆1
the manifoldW ′
i ←→ the manifoldW
W ′
i∩ (δ∪ ∆i) = ∆ i ←→ W∩ ∆1 = ∆
the subgroupGi ofπ1(W ′
i ) ←→ the subgroupG ofπ1(W )
the coverYi withπ1(Yi) = Gi ←→ the coverX withπ1(X) = G
the lifted geodesics Bi
1 ←→ the lifted geodesics B
the surface ˆSi
1 ←→ the surfaceS
Then Lemma 2.3 constructs surfaces T i andP i where the correspondence is
the shrinkwrapped surface T i ←→ the shrinkwrapped surface T
the approximating surfaceP i ←→ the approximating surface Tt
In more detail: W ′
i is isotopic to a manifold W new
i , via an isotopy ﬁxing ∆i∪ δ
pointwise. This isotopy induces a homotopy of the covering p rojectionπ : Yi→
W ′
i ⊂ N to a covering projection π new : Yi→ W new
i ⊂ N . Our ˆSi
1 is isotopic to a
surface ˆP i via an isotopy avoiding Bi
1 and the projection of ˆP i intoN is a surface
P i which is homotopic to a CAT (− 1) surface T i. Furthermore, P i and T i are at
Hausdorff distance≤ 1 and the homotopy from P i toT i is supported within the
1-neighborhood ofP i.
W e relabel superscripts, and by abuse of notation we let the sequence{T i} stand
for the old subsequence {T ki}, with δp(ki) being denoted by δp(i), etc. W e also
drop the superscript new so in particular the projection π :Yi→ W ′
i now refers to
π new :Yi→ W new
i .
W e use theδp(i)’s to show that {T i} exitsE. Let{α i} be a locally ﬁnite collection
of properly embedded rays from {δi} toE. For each i, ˆSi
1 intersects some componentω ofπ − 1(α p(i)) with algebraic intersection number 1, so ˆP i∩ π − 1(α p(i))̸=∅.
Therefore for all i, we have an inequality dist (T i,α p(i))≤ 1. Our assertion now
follows from the Bounded Diameter Lemma.
Lemma 6.1. LetE be an end of M an orientable, irreducible 3-manifold with ﬁnitely
generated fundamental group. If C is a 3-manifold compact core of M andZ is the component of M\C which contains E, then [∂EC] generates H2(Z) and is Thurston norm
minimizing. Here ∂EC is the component of ∂C which facesE.
Proof. First,∂EC is connected, or else there exists a closed curveκ inM intersecting
a component of∂EC once, henceκ is not homologous to a cycle inC, contradicting
the fact thatC is a core. That [∂EC] generatesH2(Z) follows from the fact that any
2-cyclew inZ is homologous to one in C, so the restriction of that homology to
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 45
E
∂M
∂M
C D
Wi
W ′
i
N
δp
δp(i)
δ
αp(i) αp
FIGURE 7.
Z gives a homology of w to n[∂EC] for some n. Equivalently , observe that the
inclusionC→ M is a homotopy equivalence, and use excision for homology .
LetQ⊂ int(Z) be a Thurston norm minimizing surface representing [∂EC]. W e
can choose Q to be connected since H2(Z) = Z. Let V ⊂ Z be the submanifold
between∂EC andQ. If genus(∂EC) > genus(Q), then there exists a nonzero z in
the kernel of in∗ : H1(∂EC) → H1(V ). This follows from the well known fact
that for any compact orientable 3-manifold V , the rank of the kernel of the map
in∗ : H1(∂V )→ H1(V ) is 1
2 rank(H1(∂V )). Since C is a core, z is in the kernel of
the map in∗ : H1(∂EC)→ H1(C). This gives rise to a class w′∈ H2(M ) and dual
classz′∈ H1(∂EC) with⟨z′,w ′⟩̸ = 0, which is again a contradiction. □
Using this lemma, we now complete the proof of Theorem 0.9.
LetZ denote the component of N split open along ∂EC which containsE. By
Lemma 6.1,∂EC generatesH2(Z). Next, observe that if β is any ray inZ from∂EC
46 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
toE andR is any immersed closed orientable surface in Z, then [R] = n[∂EC]∈
H2(Z) where⟨R,β ⟩ = n. T o see this, note that ⟨n[∂EC],β ⟩ = n by considering n
copies of ∂EC slightly pushed into Z and algebraic intersection number is independent of representative of homology class.
W e now useδp to show that for i sufﬁciently large [T i] is homologous in Z to
[∂EC]∈ H2(Z)∼
= Z; see Figure 7. Let β be the ray σ∗α p whereσ⊂ Z is a path
from∂EC to∂α p. For what follows assume that i is sufﬁciently large so that
N2(P i)∩ (σ∪ δp∪ C) =∅
whereN2(P i) denotes the 2–neighborhood ofP i, and hence
⟨T i,β ⟩ =⟨P i,α p⟩
W e now compute this value. By perturbingP i, if necessary , we can assume that
P i is transverse to α p and no intersections occur at double points of P i. There is a
1–1 correspondence of sets
{α p∩ P i}←→{ π − 1(α p)∩ ˆP i}
Let Bagi denote the component ofYi split along ˆP i which is disjoint from ¯Si. Note
thatπ − 1(δp)∩ ∂ Bagi =∅. If κ is a component of π − 1(α p), then⟨κ, ˆP i⟩ = 0 if no
endpoints lie in Bagi while⟨κ, ˆP i⟩ = 1 if exactly one endpoint lies in Bagi. T o see
this, orient α p so that the positive end escapes to E. Then the positive end of each
liftκ is in∂Y i, which is outside Bag i. It follows that if p is an endpoint ofκ in Bagi,
thenp is the negative end of κ, and⟨κ, ˆP i⟩ = 1 . Since ˆδp lies in Bagi, there is at
least 1 componentκ ofπ − 1(α p) with such an endpoint in Bagi, and therefore
⟨π − 1(α p), ˆP i⟩≥ 1
and hence
[T i] = n[∂EC]∈ H2(Z)
for somen≥ 1.
Therefore
|χ (∂EC)|≥| χ (Ti)|≥ xs(n[∂EC]) = x(n[∂EC]) = nx([∂EC]) = n|χ (∂EC)|
and hence n = 1 and genus(T i) = genus( ∂EC). Here x (resp. xs) denotes the
Thurston (resp. singular Thurston) norm on H2(Z). The ﬁrst inequality follows
by construction, the second by deﬁnition, the third since xs =x ([G1]), the fourth
sincex is linear on rays [T2] and the ﬁfth by Lemma 6.1. This complete s the proof
of Theorem 0.9. □
Remark 6.2. Since for i sufﬁciently large, genus(T i) = g, it follows that for such
i, no compressions occur in the passage from ¯Si to ˆSi
1. This mirrors the similar
phenomenon seen in the proof of Canary’s theorem. If the shri nkwrapped∂W ′
i is
actually a ∆i-minimal surface disjoint from ∆i, then ∂X i is a least area minimal
surface for the hyperbolic metric, and we can pass directly from ˆSi
1 to a ˆ∆i-minimal
surface ˆT i by shrinkwrapping in Xi. Our T i is then the projection of ˆT i toN .
If the shrinkwrapped∂W ′
i touches ∆i, then we can still shrinkwrap ˆSi
1 inXi. In
this caseXi is bent and possibly squeezed along parts of ˆ∆i and it is cumbersome
to discuss the geometry and topology of Xi. Therefore we chose for the purposes
of exposition to express T i as a limit of surfaces. These surfaces are projections of
gtk –minimal surfaces in the smooth Riemannian manifolds Xi with Riemannian
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 47
metrics gtk . As metric spaces, the (Xi,g tk ) converge to the bent and squeezed
hyperbolic “metric” on Xi.
T ameness CriteriaLetE be an end of the complete hyperbolic 3-manifold N with
ﬁnitely generated fundamental group and compact core C. Let Z be the component ofN\int(C) containingE with∂EC denoting∂Z . LetT1,T 2,···be a sequence
of surfaces mapped into N . Consider the following properties.
(1) genus(Ti) = genus(∂EC).
(2) Ti⊂ Z and exitE.
(3) Each Ti homologically separatesC fromE (i.e. [Ti] = [∂EC]∈ H2(Z)).
(4) Each Ti is CAT(-1).
Theorem 6.3 (Souto [So]). IfT1,T 2,···is a sequence of mapped surfaces in the complete
hyperbolic 3-manifold N with core C and endE which satisﬁes Criteria (1), (2) and (3),
thenE is topologically tame. □
Theorem 6.3 follows directly from the proof of Theorem 2, [So ]. That proof
makes essential use of the work of Bonahon [Bo] and Canary [Ca ]. W e now show
how Criterion (4) enables us to establish tameness without i nvoking the impressive technology of [Bo] and [Ca]. Our argument, inspired in p art by Souto’s work,
requires only elementary hyperbolic geometry and basic 3-m anifold topology .
A topological argument that criteria (1) - (4) imply tamenes s. It sufﬁces to consider the case thatE is the end of an end-manifold M which includes by a homotopy equivalence intoN , and thatC⊂ M is of the form∂M× I∪ 1-handles, where
the 1-handles attach to ∂M× 1 and∂M =∂M× 0.
Using standard arguments, we can replace the Ti’s by simplicial hyperbolic surfaces as deﬁned in [Ca]. The idea of how to do this is simple: the CAT (− 1) property
implies that each Ti has an essential simple closed curve κ i of length uniformly
bounded above. Ifκ ∗
i denotes the geodesic inN homotopic toκ i, then either theκ ∗
i
have length bounded below by some constant, and are therefor e contained within
a bounded neighborhood of κ i, or else the lengths of the κ ∗
i get arbitrarily short,
and therefore they escape to inﬁnity . In either case, the seq uenceκ ∗
1,κ ∗
2,··· exits
E. Then we can triangulate Ti by a 1–vertex triangulation with a vertex on κ ∗
i , and
pull the simplices tight to geodesic triangles. This produc es a simplicial hyperbolic surface, homotopic to Ti, which is contained in a bounded neighborhood of
κ ∗
i rel. the thin part of N , and therefore these surfaces also exit E. From now on
we assume that each Ti is a simplicial hyperbolic surface.
Note that either ∂EC is incompressible in N and hence M is homotopy equivalent to ∂EC× [0,∞ ) or each Ti is compressible in N , i.e. there exists an essential
simple closed curve in Ti that is homotopically trivial in N . Indeed, using the
π1-surjectivity of C and the irreducibility of N, T i can be homotoped into C. If
Ti is incompressible in N , then Ti can be homotoped off the 1-handles and then
homotoped into a component of∂M . Using Criterion (3), the degree of this map is
one, which implies that Ti is homotopic to a homeomorphism onto a component
of∂M . Since genus(Ti) = genus(∂EC), it follows that C =∂M× I and hence∂EC
is incompressible in N .
Since eitherM is homotopy equivalent to∂M× [0,∞ ) or eachTi is compressible,
it follows by Canary [Ca] and Canary–Minsky [CaM] (see also P roposition 3 [So])
48 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
that there exists a compact setK⊂ Z such that eachTi can be homotoped withinZ
to a simplicial hyperbolic surfaceT 0
i which nontrivially intersectsK. HereZ is the
closure of M− int(C). By the Bounded Diameter Lemma, there exists a compact
setK1⊂ Z such that for each i,T 0
i ⊂ K1.
Sincex =xs [G1], there exists a sequence of embedded genus-g surfacesA1,A 2,···
such that for eachi,Ai lies in a small neighborhood ofTi and [Ai] = [Ti] = [∂EC]∈
H2(Z). By passing to subsequence we can assume that the Ai’s are pairwise disjoint and each Ai is disjoint from K1 and separatesE fromK1. Let A[p,q ] denote
the compact region between Ap andAq. Since genus(Ap) = genus(∂EC), it follows
by Lemma 6.1 that Ap is Thurston norm minimizing in Z and hence isπ1-injective
inZ andA[p,p +1].
T o establish tameness it sufﬁces to show that each A[p,p +1] is a product. Fix p∈
N. Let j be sufﬁciently large so thatTj separatesA[p,p +1] fromE. Let T be a surface
of genus g = genus(∂EC). Using [Ca], [CaM], let F : T× I→ Z be a homotopy
such thatF|T× 1 = Tj andF (T× 0)⊂ K1. By Stallings and W aldhausen, after a
homotopy ofF rel∂F we can assume thatF − 1(Ap∪Ap+1) areπ1-injective surfaces
inT× (0, 1). See p. 60 [W a]. Since F (T× ∂I )∩ A[p,p +1] =∅, these surfaces are
disjoint from T× ∂I , and by arguing as in §3 [W a], they are isotopic to surfaces
of the form T× t,t∈ (0, 1). Therefore, after a further homotopy we can assume
that F − 1(Ap∪ Ap+1) = T× B, where B ⊂ (0, 1) is a ﬁnite set of points. Since
eachF|T× t homologically separatesE from∂EC, eachF|T× b is a degree-1 map
onto eitherAp orAp+1 and hence after another homotopy we can assume that for
eachb∈ B, F|T× b is a homeomorphism onto its image. Therefore there exists
b,b ′∈ B such that F|T× [b,b ′] maps degree-1 onto A[p,p +1] and the restriction of
F toT× ∂[b,b ′] is a homeomorphism. Therefore F :T× [b,b ′]→ A[p,p +1] is a π1injective, degree-1 map whose restriction to∂(T× [b,b ′]) is a homeomorphism onto
∂A [p,p +1]. Since both domain and range are irreducible, such a map is ho motopic
rel boundary to a homeomorphism, by W aldhausen [W a]. □
Remarks 6.4. (1) In the presence of an escaping sequence of CAT(-1) surfac es,
hyperbolic surface interpolation and the bounded diameter lemma is all the hyperbolic geometry needed to establish tameness.
(2) This argument makes crucial use of the fact that the homot opy F is supported inZ and eachAi is incompressible in Z.
Proof of Theorem 0.4 It sufﬁces to consider the case that N is orientable, since it
readily follows using [Tu], thatN is tame if and only if its orientable cover is tame.
IfE is geometrically ﬁnite, then by [EM] E is tame. Now assume that E is geometrically inﬁnite. Theorem 0.9 provides us with a collecti on{Ti} which satisﬁes
T ameness Criteria (1)-(4). Now apply Theorem 6.3. □
Proof of Theorem 0.2 . It sufﬁces to prove Theorem 0.2 for the geometrically inﬁnite ends of orientable manifolds. It follows from Theorem s 0.9 and 0.4 that E
is topologically of the form T× [0,∞ ), where T is a surface of genus g. Theorem
0.9 provides for us a sequence{Ti} of surfaces satisfying T ameness Criteria (1)-(4).
Since for i sufﬁciently large Ti⊂ T× [0,∞ ) and homologically separates T× 0
fromE, it follows that the projection Ti to T× 0 is a degree 1 map of a genus g
surface to itself and hence is homotopic to a homeomorphism. □
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 49
7. T HE PARABOLIC CASE
Thanks to the careful expositions in [Bo], [Ca] and [So] it is now routine to obtain general theorems in the presence of parabolics from the corresponding results
in the parabolic free case.
W e now give the basic deﬁnitions and provide statements of ou r results in the
parabolic setting.
The following is well known, e.g. see [Ca] for an expanded ver sion of more or
less the following discussion. Let N be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold, then
for sufﬁciently small ǫ, the ǫ-thin part, N≤ ǫ ofN is a union of solid tori (Margulis
tubes), rank-1 cusps and rank-2 cusps. Let N≥ ǫ denote N\int(N≤ ǫ). The space
N ǫ
0 =N≥ ǫ∪ Margulis tubes is called the neutered space ofN , though we often drop
theǫ. The parabolic locus ∂N ǫ
0 = P ǫ (usually just denoted P ) is a ﬁnite union of
toriT1,···,T m and open annuli A1,···An. Each annulus Ai is of the form S1× R
such that for t∈ R, each S1× t bounds a standard 2-dimensional cusp in N≤ ǫ.
Let N 0
≤ ǫ denote the cusp components of N≤ ǫ. By [Mc], N has a compact core
C⊂ N0 which is also a core of N0 and the restriction to each component P ′ ofP
is a core of P ′. Such a core for N0 is called a relative core. In particular if P ′ is an
annulus, then we can assume that C∩ P ′ =S1× [t,s ]. By Bonahon [Bo], the ends
ofN0 are in 1-1 correspondence with components of ∂C/P . If N = H3/ Γ, then an
end of N0 is geometrically ﬁnite if it has a neighborhood disjoint from C(Γ)/ Γ, the
convex core of N . Such an end has an exponentially ﬂaring geometry similar to
that of a geometrically ﬁnite end of a parabolic free manifol d. The end E ofN0 is
topologically tame if it is a relative product, i.e. there is a compact surface S and an
embeddingS× [0,∞ )→ N0 which parametrizesE. If U is a neighborhood of E,
then by passing to a smaller neighborhood we can assume that U∩ Ai is either∅
or of the form S1× (t,∞ ) orS1× ((−∞ ,s )∪ (t,∞ )). Adding the corresponding
2-dimensional cusps to S1× pts. we obtain UP the parabolic extension ofU . So if E
is topologically tame, UP is topologically SP× [0,∞ ), where SP is topologically
int(S) and geometricallyS with cusps added.
Following [Bo] and [Ca] we say that the end E ofN0 is simply degenerate if it is
topologically tame, has a neighborhoodU with a sequencefi :SP→ UP such that
fi induces a CAT(− 1) structure onSP , thefi’s eventually miss given compact sets
and eachfi is properly homotopic in UP to a homeomorphism of SP ontoSP× 0.
W e say thatE is geometrically tame if it is simply degenerate or geometrically ﬁnite.
The manifoldN is geometrically tame if each end of N0 is geometrically tame.
Francis Bonahon showed that if ǫ is sufﬁciently small, then an end E of N ǫ
0 is
geometrically inﬁnite if and only if there exists a sequence ∆ = {δi} of closed
geodesics lying in N ǫ
0 and exitingE.
W e can now state the general version of the results stated in t he introduction.
Theorem 7.1. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group with neutered space N0. The endE ofN0 is simply degenerate if there exists
a sequence of closed geodesics exiting the end.
Theorem 7.2. A complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fu ndamental
group is geometrically tame.
Theorem 7.3. If N is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then each end of N0 is topologically tame. In particular, each end of N is
topologically tame.
50 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Theorem 7.4. IfN = H3/ Γ is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated
fundamental group, then the limit set LΓ of Γ is either S2
∞ or has Lebesgue measure zero.
IfLΓ =S2
∞ , then Γ acts ergodically on S2
∞ .
Theorem 7.5 (Classiﬁcation Theorem). IfN is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with
ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then N is determined up to isometry by its topological type, its parabolic structure, the conformal boundary ofN0’s geometrically ﬁnite ends
and the ending laminations of N0’s geometrically inﬁnite ends.
Theorem 7.6 (Density Theorem) . If N = H3/ Γ is a complete ﬁnitely generated 3manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then Γ is the algebraic limit of geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian groups.
Theorem 7.7. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group and with associated neutered space N0. LetE be an end of N0 with relative
compact core C. Let S be a compact surface with the topological type of δEC, the component of the frontier of C which facesE. Let UE denote a parabolic extension of a neighborhood ofE. If there exists a sequence of closed geodesics exiting E, then there exists a
sequence{Si} of proper CAT(− 1) surfaces inUP homeomorphic to int (S) which eventually miss every compact set and such that each Si∩ N0 homologically separatesC fromE.
Furthermore, ifSi∩ N0 lies to theE side of C, then no accidental parabolic α⊂ Si∩ N0
can be homotoped into a cusp via a homotopy disjoint from C.
Remarks 7.8. (1) Theorem 7.7 is the main technical result of this section a nd
at the end of this section we will deduce from it Theorems 7.1 a nd 7.3.
(2) Theorem 7.3 has been independently proven by Agol [Ag].
(3) Theorem 7.1 implies Theorem 7.2 as follows. A complete hy perbolic 3manifold is geometrically tame if each end of N0 is either geometrically
ﬁnite or simply degenerate. By deﬁnition, ends of N0 are either geometrically ﬁnite or geometrically inﬁnite. Using Bonahon’s char acterization of
geometrically inﬁnite ends and Theorem 7.1 it follows that g eometrically
inﬁnite ends are simply degenerate.
(4) Theorem 7.4 immediately follows from Theorem 7.2 by the w ork of Thurston
[T] and Canary [Ca]. It also follows from [Ca] that the variou s results of§9
[Ca] hold for N .
(5) Theorem 7.3 is the last step needed to prove the monumenta l classiﬁcation theorem, the other parts being established by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky ,
Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kelineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire–
Ohshika, Hossein–Souto and Rees. See [Mi] and [BCM].
(6) The Density Theorem was conjectured by Bers, Sullivan an d Thurston.
Theorem 7.3 is one of very many results, many of them recent, n eeded to
build a proof. Major contributions were made by Alhfors, Ber s, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky ,
Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kelineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire–
Ohshika, Hossein–Souto, Rees, Bromberg and Brock–Bromber g.
(7) The rest of this section is devoted to proving Theorems 7. 7, 7.1 and 7.3.
Given the manifold N with neutering N0 and endE ofN0 we explain how to
ﬁnd a relative end-manifoldM containingE.
Deﬁnition 7.9. If A is a cod-0 submanifold of a manifold with boundary , then
the frontierδA ofA is the closure of ∂A− ∂M . If (R,∂R )⊂ (N0,P ) is a mapped
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 51
surface (resp. R is a properly mapped surface in N whose ends exit the cusps),
then a P -essential annulus forR is annulus (resp. half open annulus) A with one
component mapped to an essential simple curve of R which cannot be homotoped
within R into ∂R (resp. an end of R) and another component (resp. the end of
A) mapped into P (resp. properly mapped into a cusp). Let C0 be a 3-manifold
relative core ofN0. Using [Mc] we can assume thatC0 is of the formH0∪ 1-handles
where P0 = C0∩ P = H0∩ P is a core of P consisting of annuli and tori and
H0 is a compact 3-manifold with incompressible frontier. Furt hermore δH0 has
noP -essential annuli disjoint from int (H0). Deﬁne δEC0 to be the component of
δC0 which facesE and δEH0 to be the components of δH0 which faceE. Deﬁne
M to be the closure of the component of N0 split along δEH0 which containsE.
Deﬁne ∂pM = P∩ M and ∂hM = δEH0. W e call M a relative end-manifold . By
construction ∂hM has no P -essential annuli lying in M . By slightly thickening
∂hM and retaining the 1-handles of C0∩ M we obtain a core C of M . If W is a
codimension-0 submanifold of M , then∂pW (resp.∂hW ) denotesW∩ ∂pM (resp.
W∩ ∂hM ).
By passing to the π1(M ) cover ofN we reduce to the case that in :M→ N0 is a
homotopy equivalence; furthermore, for each component R of∂hM , the inclusion
ofR into the corresponding component of N0\int(M ) is a homotopy equivalence.
By passing to a subsequence we can assume that ∆ = {δi} is a collection of
geodesics escapingE and is weakly 1000-separating. As in Lemma 5.5 [Ca] we
slightly perturb the hyperbolic metric in the 1-neighborhood of ∆ to a metric µ
such that for each i,δi isǫ-homotopic to a simple geodesic γi andµ has pinched
negative curvature in (− 1. 01,−. 99) and is 1. 01-bilipshitz equivalent to the hyperbolic metric. Let Γ be the resulting collection of simple closed curves.
Lemma 7.10. Let M be a relative end-manifold in the complete hyperbolic 3–manifold
N . Given a sequence Γ of homotopically essential closed curves we can pass to an in ﬁnite
subsequence also called Γ which is the disjoint union γ1∪ γ2∪ γ3∪··· where γ1 has
ﬁnitely many components and the other γi’s have one component. If Γi denotes∪ i
j=1γj,
then there exists a manifoldW open inM , exhausted by a sequence of compact manifolds
{Wi} with the following properties,
(1)W isπ1 andH1 injective (in Z and Z/ 2Z coeﬁcients) inM and henceN .
(2) For all i,∂ hW1 = ∂hWi and is a union of components of ∂hM . At most one
component of ∂pW1 can lie in a component of ∂pM . For all i,∂ pWi is a union of
essential annuli, each of which contains a component of ∂pW1. The frontier δWi
is connected, separates Γi fromE and is 2-incompressible rel Γi.
(3) There exists a compact submanifold core F⊂ W1 ofW such that each Γi can be
homotoped intoF via a homotopy supported inWi.F is of the form (W1∩∂M )×I
with 1-handles attached to the 1-side. Finally |χ (δF )|≤| χ (δC)|.
Proof. Except for the last inequality , this lemma is just the relative form of that part
of Theorem 5.21 which was used to prove Theorem 0.9. Let J be a connected compact set and V1⊂ V2⊂ V3··· an exhaustion of M such that ∂hM⊂ ∂V 1 and the
∂pVi are the tori ofM and essential annuli which meet each annular component of
∂pM in exactly one component. Deﬁne the relative end reductionWJ ofJ to be the
52 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
manifold exhausted by submanifolds {Wi} whereVi passes to Wi via the operations of compression, 2-handle addition, deletion and isot opy , where the compressions and 2-handle additions are done only to δVi and its successors. The same
arguments as before show that WJ is both π1 andH1-injective and as before we
can deﬁne relative notions of end non separable and end-engu lﬁng respectively
for ﬁnite and locally ﬁnite inﬁnite collections of homotopy essential pairwise disjoint closed curves. Similarly , since W is a relative end manifold its core can be
taken to be of the form stated in 3. The last inequality is the r elative version of
inequality (∗) from the proof of Theorem 0.9. □
W e now show that each Wi is an atoroidal Haken manifold with negative Euler characteristic by showing that every embedded torus inc ompressible in Wi is
boundary parallel and some component of∂W i is not a 2-sphere. If T is an embedded torus inN , then eitherT cuts off a rank-2 cusp orT is compressible. Therefore,
if each component of∂W i is a torus incompressible inN , thenN has ﬁnite volume
and Theorem 7.7 holds. The proof of the Claim of §6 shows that no component of
∂W is a torus compressible in N . Therefore, some component of ∂W i has genus
≥ 2. Since tori incompressible in N cut off rank-2 cusps, any nonboundary parallel torus T in Wi must be compressible in N . T o show that T is compressible
inWi, it sufﬁces to show that it is compressible in W P
i the parabolic extension of
Wi inN . Now ∂W P
i is a ﬁnite union of properly embedded surfaces in N which
are incompressible in N\Γi andN has pinched negative sectional curvature. The
proof of the Claim now applies to show that every embedded tor us in W P
i which
is compressible in N is also compressible in W P
i .
Lemma 7.11. If (E,∂E )⊂ (N0,P ) is a compact Γ-minimal surface (possibly non embedded), thenE cannot be homotoped rel ∂E intoP .
Supposef : R→ N is a properly mapped Γ-minimal surface such that for each ǫ >
0, f − 1(N ǫ
0) is compact andR has noP -essential annuli disjoint from Γ. Iff is transverse
to N ǫ
0, then each component of R\int(f − 1(N ǫ
0)) is either a compact disc or a half open
annulus.
Proof. If such a homotopy exists, then the lift ˜E ofE to H3 has the property that
there exists a closed horoball H with∂ ˜E⊂ int(H) andE∩ ∂H̸=∅. This violates
the maximum principle.
Therefore if σ is a component of f − 1(P ) which bounds a disc D in R, then
f (D)∩ N0⊂ P . If σ is essential in R, then σ can be homotoped into an end of R,
since there are no P -essential annuli for R disjoint from Γ. Again the maximum
principle implies that the entire annular region bounded by σ is mapped into a
component ofN\int(N0). □
If W ⊂ N is a codimension 0 submanifold, we say that W has standardly embedded cusps if the restriction of W to each Margulis tube neighborhood of a cusp
ofN is either the entire cusp, or is a ﬁnite union of products annu lus× R+ where
the product structure is compatible with the product struct ure on the cusp. If N is
obtained from a complete hyperbolic manifold by neutering, then this neutering
should restrict to a neutering of W .
Here is the parabolic version of Lemma 2.3. The reader may wan t to refresh
their memory by ﬁrst rereading Lemma 2.3:
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 53
Lemma 7.12 (Parabolic construction lemma) . LetE be an end of the complete open
orientable irreducible Riemannian 3–manifold N with metric µ , with ﬁnitely generated
fundamental group, and neutering N0 with parabolic locus P . Let W ⊂ N be a submanifold such that ∂W ∩ int(N ) separates W fromE, and whose ends are standardly
embedded cusps in the cusps of N . Let ∆1⊂ N0\∂W be a ﬁnite collection of simple closed
geodesics with ∆ = W∩ ∆1 a non–empty proper subset of ∆1. Suppose futher that ∂W
is 2–incompressible rel. ∆ and has no P –essential annuli disjoint from ∆1.
Let the Riemannian metric µ on N agree with a hyperbolic metric outside tubular
neighborhoodsNǫ(∆1) and inside tubular neighborhoods Nǫ/ 2(∆1), having ∆1 as core
geodesics, and such thatµ is a metric with sectional curvature pinched between− 1. 01 and
− 0. 99.
LetG be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(W ), and let X be the covering space of W
corresponding to G. Let Σ be the preimage of ∆ inX with ˆ∆⊂ Σ a subset which maps
homeomorphically onto ∆ under the covering projection, and let B⊂ ˆ∆ be a nonempty
union of geodesics. Suppose there exists a properly embedde d surface S ⊂ X\B of ﬁnite topological type, whose ends are standard cusps in the c usps of X such that S is
2–incompressible rel. B inX and has no P -essential annuli disjoint from B, and which
separates every component of B from∂X .
Then∂W can be properly homotoped to a ∆1–minimal surface which, by abuse of notation, we call ∂W ′, and the map of S intoN given by the covering projection is properly
homotopic to a map whose image T ′ is ∆1–minimal and whose ends exit the cusps of N .
Also,∂W ′ (resp.T ′) can be perturbed by an arbitrarily small perturbation to be an embedded (resp. smoothly immersed) surface ∂W t (resp.Tt) boundingWt with the following
properties:
(1) There exists a proper isotopy from ∂W to ∂W t which never crosses ∆1, and
which induces a proper isotopy from W toWt, and a corresponding deformation
of pinched negatively curved manifolds X toXt which ﬁxes Σ pointwise.
(2) There exists a proper isotopy from S toSt⊂ Xt which never crossesB, such that
Tt is the projection of St toN .
(3) Each of the limit surfaces F ∈{ ∂W ′,T ′} relatively exits the manifold as its
restriction exits the neutered part. That is, if C is a rank 1 cusp foliated by
totally geodesic 2 dimensional cuspsC× R perpendicular to the boundary annulus
S1× R, then if the intersection ofF with∂C is contained in the regionS1× [t,∞ ),
the intersection of F withC is contained in the region C× [t,∞ ), and similarly
if the intersection is contained in S1× (−∞ ,t ].
Proof. The essential differences between the statements of Lemma 2.3 and Lemma 7.12
are ﬁrstly that the metric in the parabolic case is pinched, s o that the geodesics can
be chosen to be simple; secondly that the surfaces in questio n are all properly embedded, and the isotopies and homotopies are all proper; and thirdly that the limit
surfaces relatively exit the manifold as their restriction exits the neutered part.
These issues are all minor, and do not introduce any real comp lications in the
proof. The only question whose answer might not be immediatl y apparent is how
to perturb the metricµ to thegt metrics near cusps; it turns out that this is straightforward to do, and technically easier than deformations alo ng geodesics, since the
perturbed metrics actually have curvature bounded above by 0.
W e will ﬁnd an exhaustion ofN by increasingly larger neutered spacesN t
0, each
endowed with a metric gt, which is obtained from the µ -metric by deforming it
along the geodesics ∆1 and along∂N t
0. Our∂W t will restrict togt-area minimizing
54 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
representatives of the isotopy class of ∂W∩ N t
0. The convergence and regularity
of the limit surface ∂W ′ near the geodesics will proceed exactly as in §1 and§2.
The convegence and regularity in the cusps will follow from §1 using the absence
ofP -essential annuli disjoint from ∆1.
T o describe the deformed geometry along the cusps, we ﬁrst re call the usual
hyperbolic geometry of the (rank 1) cusps. W e parameterize a rank 1 cuspC as
S1× [1,∞ )× R, where the initial S1× [1,∞ ) factor is a 2–dimensional cusp C.
With the hyperbolic metric, the three co–ordinate vector ﬁe lds are orthogonal; we
denote these by ∂
∂θ, ∂
∂z and ∂
∂y respectively , so thatθ∈ S1,z∈ [1,∞ ) andy∈ R.
An orthonormal basis in the hyperbolic metric is z ∂
∂θ,z ∂
∂z,z ∂
∂y . Let h : R+→ R+
be a monotone increasing function with h(z) = z forz <1, andh(z) = 2 forz≥ 3.
Then let
ht(z) = 1
1− th((1− t)z)
and deﬁnegt onC to be the metric with orthonormal basisht(z) ∂
∂θ,h t(z) ∂
∂z,h t(z) ∂
∂y .
Notice that the group of Euclidean symmetries of the boundar y∂C extends to an
isometry ofC for thegt metric, for all t. In particular, the surface
Hs =S1× [1,∞ )× s
is totally geodesic for the gt metric, and therefore acts as a barrier surface for allt.
Moreover, ast→ 1, the gt metrics converge to the hyperbolic metrics on compact subsets, and in fact for every compact K⊂C , there is an s >0 such that the
gt and the hyperbolic metrics agree for t≤ s. Finally , for each t > 0, the subset
S1× [3/ (1− t),∞ )× R⊂C is isometric to a Euclidean product, for the gt metric,
and therefore the surface
Ft =S1× 3
1− t× R
is totally geodesic for the gt metric, and also acts as a barrier surface.
Finally , notice that thegt metrics lift to a family of isometric metrics on H3, and
by the symmetries above, therefore have uniformly pinched s ectional curvatures,
and are uniformly bilipschitz to the hyperbolic metric in th e region bounded away
from the cusps by Ft.
LetN t
0 be the neutered space whose boundary consists of the surfaces of typeFt
constructed above. Endow N t
0 with thegt metric. Now apply [MSY], as in Lemma
2.3, to the surface ∂W∩N t
0 to obtain the surface∂W 1
t which isgt-least area among
all surfaces properly isotopic to ∂W∩ N t
0. By extending ∂W 1
t vertically we obtain
the surface ∂W t⊂ N which is properly isotopic to ∂W . As in Lemma 2.3 these
surfaces weakly converge geometrically to a surface ∂W ′. W e will show that there
is a proper isotopy of ∂W to∂W ′.
Let N ǫ
0 denote a ﬁxed neutered space transverse to ∂W ′ and countably many
∂W t’s which converge to ∂W ′. Deﬁne ∂W ǫ
t to be ∂W t∩ N ǫ
0 together with the
disc components of ∂W t\N ǫ
0. Since areagt (∂W ǫ
t ) is uniformly bounded, and the
hyperbolic area form is dominated on all 2–planes by gt, the hyperbolic area of
∂W ǫ
t is uniformly bounded. W e show that a disc D of ∂W t\N ǫ
0 cannot stray too
far into the cusp and hence for all t, ∂W ǫ
t ⊂ N η
0 for some sufﬁciently small η.
Indeed, the lift ˜D to the universal cover ˜N ofN is an embedded disc of uniformly
bounded area. If t is very close to 1, then dρ (∂N ǫ
0,∂N t
0) = dt > 0. If x∈ ˜D and
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 55
dρ (x,∂N ǫ
0∪ N t
0) = dt/ 2, then areaρ ( ˜D∩ (N ǫ
0− N t
0)) > πd2
t/ 4. Therefore, for t
sufﬁciently large, ˜D and henceD has uniformly bounded ρ-diameter.
Therefore, if ǫ < η, then the ∂W ǫ
t ’s converge weakly to the surface N ǫ
0∩ W ′
which we deﬁne to be ∂W ′
ǫ. For t sufﬁciently large∂W ǫ
t and∂W ′
ǫ are of the same
topological type and very close geometrically . By Lemma 7.1 1,∂W ′
ǫ∩ N ǫ
0 has no
components which can be homotoped rel boundary into ∂N ǫ
0, hence ∂W ǫ
t shares
the similar property . Since ∂W has no P -essential annuli disjoint from ∆1 it follows that each component of ∂W ǫ
t\intN0 can be properly homotoped in ∂W ǫ
t into
an end of that surface. Therefore, if some non disc component of ∂W t− intN ǫ
0
was not a half open annulus, then one can ﬁnd a component E of∂W t∩ N ǫ
0 which
can be homotoped rel ∂E into∂N ǫ
0, which is a contradiction. Note that ∂W ′
ǫ is of
the same topological type as ∂W ∩ N0 and and that the ∂W ′
ǫ’s form an exhaustion of ∂W ′. By arguing as in the proof of Lemma 1.25, there exists a homot opy
F : ∂W× I→ N with the property that F (∂W × 0) = ∂W , for inﬁnitely many
t< 1,F (∂W× t) = ∂W t andF (∂W× 1) = ∂W ′.
If∂W ′ intersects∂C in the subset S1× [s,∞ ) for some s, then for t sufﬁciently
large∂W t must intersect ∂C in the subset S1× [s− ǫ,∞ ). Since projection to the
barrier surface Hs− ǫ along horoannuli and horotori is area reducing, this implie s
that∂W t∩C is contained in S1× [1,∞ )× [s− ǫ,∞ ), which in turn implies that
W ′∩C⊂ S1× [1,∞ )× [s,∞ ). As in Lemma 2.3, the surfaces ∂W t converge on
compact subsets to ∂W ′. The main results of§1 imply that ∂W ′ is ∆1–minimal.
A similar argument proves similar facts about St,Tt andT ′. □
Let Gi denote in ∗ (π1(F )) ⊂ π1(Wi). Fix a basepoint f ∈ F . Let Xi denote
the covering space of Wi (based at f ) with group Gi. The homotopy of Γi intoF
supported inWi lifts toXi, hence provides us with a canonical ˆΓi of closed lifts of
Γi in 1-1 correspondence with Γi. Since Wi is an atoroidal Haken manifold with
nonzero Euler characteristic, it follows by Thurston that i nt(Xi) is topologically
tame (see Proposition 3.2 [Ca]). By [Tu2] a compactiﬁcation ¯Xi of int(Xi) extends
int(Xi)∪ ∂h ˆF∪ ∂p ˆF , where ˆF is the lift of F to Xi. Since ˆF is a core of ¯Xi it
follows that ¯Xi is a union of a closed (possibly disconnected or empty) orien table
surface× I with 1-handles attached to the surface× 1 side. Let ¯Si denote the unique
boundary component of ¯Xi which is not a closed component of ˆF . Push ¯Si\int( ˆF∩
∂ ¯Xi) slightly to obtain a properly embedded surface ˆSi⊂ Xi with∂ ˆSi =∂δ ˆF via
a homotopy disjoint from ˆΓi. Being connected with the same Euler characteristic
and same number of boundary components, ˆSi is of the same topological type as
δF . Let ˆZ ′′
i ⊂ ¯Xi be the compact region with frontier ˆSi. Letχ :=|χ ( ˆSi)|=|χ (δF )|.
Deﬁne∂pXi and∂hXi the respective preimages of ∂pWi and∂hWi.
LetW ′
i denoteWi together with the components of N0\int(M ) which hit ∂W 1.
Let Yi be the cover of W ′
i with π1(Yi) = Gi. As in the parabolic free case, Xi
naturally embeds in Yi and the inclusion is a homotopy equivalence. Deﬁne ∂pYi
to be the preimage of∂pW ′
i . Note that δWi, the frontier ofWi⊂ M equalsδW ′
i , the
frontier ofW ′
i inN0.
If possible compress ˆZ ′′
i along δ ˆZ ′′
i = ˆSi via compressions that hit ˆΓi at most
once. Continue in this manner to obtain the region ˆZ ′
i whose frontier is 2-incompressible
rel ˆBi := ˆΓi\{γi1,···,γ im} where both m and|χ (δ ˆZ ′
i)|≤ χ . Since Xi\ˆΓi is irreducible, we can assume that no component of ∂ ˆZ ′
i is a 2-sphere.
56 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
Before we shrinkwrap δW ′
i and δ ˆZ ′
i we need to annulate them, i.e. compress
them along essential annuli into P and ∂pYi. Geometrically we are eliminating
accidental parabolics so that we can invoke Lemma 7.12.
LetL1,···,L k be a maximal collection of pairwise disjoint, embedded, ess ential annuli in N0 disjoint from Γi such that for each j, ∂L j has one component
onδW ′
i and one component on P . Furthermore assume that int (Li)∩ δW ′
i =∅.
Now annulate δW ′
i along each Li to obtain the surface δW L
i . So if Li lies to the
outside of W ′
i , then the effect on Wi is to add N (Li). If Li⊂ W ′
i andLi× I is a
product neighborhood, then this annulation deletesLi× int(I) fromW ′
i . There are
no P -essential annuli for δW L
i disjoint from Γi and ∂W L
i is 2-incompressible rel
Γi. Indeed, since δW L
i is embedded and 2-incompressible, we need only consider
embeddedP -essential annuli, by the generalized Loop theorem. The mod iﬁcation
W ′
i→ W L
i induces a modiﬁcation of Yi as follows. If Lj annulatesW ′
i to the outside, then enlarge Yi in the natural way . This will enlarge the parabolic boundary
∂pYi. If δW ′
i gets annulated to the inside, then do not change Yi. By abuse of notation, we relabel the space obtained from Yi as Yi. Let W l
i denote Wi modiﬁed
only along outer P -essential annuli. Note that Yi is a covering space of W l
i . In like
manner, annulateδ ˆZ ′
i along a maximal collection of pairwise disjoint annuli which
are disjoint from ˆBi. Let ˆZi⊂ Yi denote the result of annulating ˆZ ′
i. Note that ˆZi
can be constructed so that there are no ∂pYi-essential annuli for δ ˆZi disjoint from
ˆBi.
Now ﬁx i. Let γ∈ Γ\W L
i . Apply Lemma 7.12 using the following dictionary
between our setting and the setting of Lemma 7.12: δ ˆZi corresponds to the surfaceS,W L
i corresponds to W, Yi corresponds to X,γ∪ Γi corresponds to ∆1, Γi
corresponds to ∆, and ˆBi corresponds to B. W e conclude that if Si denotes the
projection of δ ˆZi intoN , then Si is homotopic to a CAT (− 1) surfaceT i with the
following properties. The surface T i is homotopic to a surface P i⊂ W new
i where
W new
i is isotopic toW l
i andP i lifts to an embedded surface ˆP i⊂ Y new
i , whereY new
i
is the corresponding cover of W new
i . The isotopy of W new
i toW l
i induces a deformation of spacesY new
i toYi which ﬁxes ˆBi pointwise. Futhermore, ˆP i is isotopic to
the correspondingδ ˆZi via an isotopy disjoint from ˆBi. Given ǫ> 0, the P i can be
chosen so that the homotopy of T i toP i restricted toN ǫ
0 lies in anǫ-neighborhood
ofP i∩N ǫ
0. By abuse of notation we will view ˆP i as bounding the region ˆZi⊂ Y new
i
and we will drop the superscripts new , etc.
Let{α i} be a locally ﬁnite collection of embedded proper rays in N0 toE emanating from{γi}.
Letπ : Yi→ N be the composition of the covering map to W l
i and inclusion.
Let Bi = π ( ˆBi). If b∈ Bi and is disjoint from N (P i, 1), then some component
ofT i homologically separates b fromE. Indeed if α b is the ray from b toE, then
π − 1(α b)∩ ˆZi is a ﬁnite union of compact segments. If both endpoints lie in∂Y i, then
it contributes nothing to the algebraic intersection numbe r⟨α b,P i⟩. Otherwise it
has one endpoint in π − 1(α b) and one in ∂Y i and hence contributes +1. Therefore
⟨α b,T i⟩ =⟨α b,P i⟩> 0.
Since|Bi|→∞ , the Bi’s are weakly 1000 separating and the T i’s have uniformly
bounded area, it follows that for i sufﬁciently large, some b∈ Bi\Bji is disjoint
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 57
fromN (P i, 1), where ji < iand lim i→∞ ji =∞ . Therefore some subsequence of
components of{T i} exitsE.
By reducingǫ, if necessary , we can assume that∂N ǫ
0 is transverse to all the T i’s.
By Lemma 7.11, for each i, each component of T i∩ (N\int(N0)) is either a disc or
a half open annulus. Therefore, the restriction of each comp onent of T i toN0 is a
connected surface.
Lemma 7.13. LetM be a relative end-manifold with core C of the form ∂hM× I∪ 1−
handles. Let Z denote the closure of M− C with∂pZ =∂pM∩ Z and∂EZ =∂EC.
(1) Z is Thurston norm minimizing in H2(Z,∂ pZ) = Z.
(2) IfR is a Thurston norm minimizing surface (in either the singula r or embedded
norms), representing [∂EZ]∈ H2(Z,∂ pZ), then for each component Q of∂pZ we
have|R∩ Q|= 1. In particular, R has noP -essential annuli in Z.
Corollary 7.14. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with neutering N0 and relative core C forN0. Let R⊂ N0− C be a primitive Thurston norm minimizing surface
representing an element of H2(N0− C,∂ pN0). Then every homotopy of an accidental
parabolic ofR into∂pN0 must crossC. □
Proof of Lemma. The proof of 1 is similar to that of Lemma 6.1. Recall that sinc eC
is a core, the inclusion (∂EZ,∂∂ EZ)→ (Z,∂ p(Z)) is an isomorphism.
Now let R be a possibly singular Thurston norm minimizing surface rep resenting [∂EZ]. By [G1], χ (R) = χ (∂EZ), so if R hits ∂p(Z) in extra components,
then genus(R) < genus(∂EZ). Let S ⊂ Z be an embedded surface representing [∂EZ] such that R lies in int (Z ′) where Z ′ is the compact submanifold cut
off by S. If {a1,···,a 2g} is a basis of cycles in H1(∂EZ,∂∂ EZ) which are disjoint from ∂∂ EZ, then there exists surfaces A1,···,A 2g with∂A i⊂ ∂EZ∪ S and
[Ai∩ ∂EZ] = ni[ai]∈ H1(∂EZ,∂∂ EZ) where ni ̸= 0 . For each i, let [Ai∩ S] =
bi∈ H1(S,∂S ). Since the subgroup of H1(S,∂S ) which restricts trivially to ∂S is
of rank < 2g, it follows that b1,···,b 2g are linearly dependent. This implies that
inclusion (∂EZ,∂∂ EZ)→ (Z,∂ p(Z)) is not H1-injective, a contradiction. If R had
aP -essential annulus, then we can construct a norm minimizing surfaceR′ with
|∂R ′|=|∂R|+ 2. □
W e next show that if some component T of T i has the property that T∩ N0
homologically separatesC fromE, thenT =T i is homeomorphic to ∂EC and represents the class [∂EC]∈ H2(N0,P ). Suppose that [T∩ N0] = n[∂EC]∈ H2(N0,P ).
By Lemma 7.11, after a homotopy supported in a small neighbor hood of the cusps
we can push the disc components of T∩ N\int(N0) intoN0 and get|χ (F )|≥ χ≥
|χ (T )|=|χ (T∩ N0)|. By Lemma 7.10,|χ (∂EC|≥| χ (F )|. On the other hand
|χ (T )|≥ xs(n[∂EC]) = x(n[∂EC]) = nx(n[∂EC]) = n|χ (∂EC)|,
where thex andxs respectively denote the Thurston and singular Thurston norms
and the inequality is by deﬁnition, the ﬁrst equality by [G1] , the second by [T2]
and the third by Lemma 7.13. The only possibility is that n = 1 and|χ (T )| =
|χ (∂EC)| = χ and hence T = T i. By Lemma 7.13, T and ∂EC have the same
number of boundary components and hence T =T i is homeomorphic to ∂EC. In
particular no compressions or annulations occurred to ˆSi.
W e claim that the sequence{T i∩N0} exitsN0. Otherwise, there exists anm with
1≤ m≤ χ , a subsequence T i1,T i2,··· and a compact connected submanifold
58 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
K1⊂ N0 such that C ⊂ K1 and for each j, m components of T ij non trivially
intersectK1 and if Rij are the components of T ij which miss K1, then Rij∩ N0
is an exiting sequence. Since each component T of T ij hasT∩ N0 connected, it
follows from the bounded diameter lemma that there exists a c ompact setK2 such
that for all j, if T is a component of T ij with T∩ K1 ̸=∅, then T∩ N0 ⊂ K2.
LetN be so large that γN∩ α N∩ N2(K2) = ∅ andγN ⊂ Bij for inﬁnitely many
values ofj. Let βN be a path from γN toK2. Since Rij exitsN0 it follows that for j
sufﬁciently large (γN∪βN )∩N2(T ij ) =∅. This implies that some component T of
T ij homologically separates γN and hence C fromE. Therefore|χ (T )|=χ . Since
T∩ α N̸=∅, this implies that T⊂ Rij and hencem = 0, which is a contradiction.
Since the sequence{T i∩ N0} exitsN0 it follows from the previous paragraphs
that for i sufﬁciently large,T i is homeomorphic to ˆSi, and T i∩ N0 represents the
class [∂EC]∈ H2(N0,P ). Since {T i} exitsE, if B is a cusp of N parametrized by
S1× [0,∞ )× R, then by Proposition 7.12, given n∈ R, T i∩ B⊂ S1× [0,∞ )×
(n,∞ ) □
Remark 7.15. Since for i sufﬁciently large,T i is of topological type of ∂EC, it follows a posteriori that no compressions or annulations occurred in the passage from
¯Si to∂ ˆZi. This mirrors the similar phenomena seen in the proofs of Can ary’s theorem and Theorem 0.9.
Proof of Theorem 7.3. T ameness of the ends ofN0 follows as in the proof of Theorem 0.4. In particular if the end E ofN0 is not geometrically ﬁnite, then by applying the proof of Theorem 2 [So] to {T i} (with the disc components of {T i}∩
(cusps) pushed intoN0) it follows thatE is tame. Alternatively , as in the proof that
Criteria (1)-(4) implies tameness, we can use the hyperboli c surface interpolation
technique and basic 3-manifold topology to prove thatE is tame. Finally tameness
ofN0 implies tameness of N . □
Proof of Theorem 7.1. It sufﬁces to prove Theorem 7.1 for orientable manifolds
which have the homotopy type of a relative end-manifold. It f ollows from Theorems 7.7 and 7.3 that a parabolic extension UP of a neighborhood U ofE is topologically of the form int(T )× [0,∞ ), where T is a surface homeomorphic to ∂EC
andC is a core of N0. By Proposition 7.12, if (T i∩ ∂N 0)⊂ int(T )× [t,∞ ), then
T i\intN0⊂ int(T )× [t,∞ ). Therefore{T i} exits compact sets in int(T )× [0,∞ ).
Since fori sufﬁciently large,T i is properly immersed in int(T )× [0,∞ ) and homologically separates int(T )× 0 fromE, it follows that the projection Ti to int(T )× 0
is a proper degree-1 map of a surface of ﬁnite type to itself an d hence is properly
homotopic to a homeomorphism. □
REFERENCES
[Ag] I. Agol, T ameness of hyperbolic3–manifolds, eprint math.GT/0405568
[A1] L. Ahlfors, Finitely generated Kleinian groups , Amer. J. Math. 86 (1964), 413–429.
[A2]
, Fundamental polygons and limit point sets of Kleinian group s, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 55
(1966), 251–254.
[Ath] I. Athanasopoulos, Coincidence set of minimal surfaces for the thin obstacle , Manuscripta Math. 42
(1983), no. 2-3, 199–209
[B] W . Ballmann, Lectures on spaces of nonpositive curvature , Birkhauser, DMV seminar 25 (1995)
[Be] L. Bers, Local behavior of solutions of general elliptic equations, Comm. Pure. Appl. Math. 8 (1955),
473–496.
[Bo] F. Bonahon, bouts des varietes de dimension 3 , Annals of Math. 124 (1986), 71–158.
SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 59
[BH] M. Bridson & A. Haeﬂiger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature , Springer-V erlag, Grundlehr.
der Math. Wiss. 319 (1999)
[BT1] M. Brin & T. L. Thickstun, Open, irreducible 3-manifolds which are end 1-movable , Topology ,26,
211–233.
[BT2] , 3-Manifolds which are end 1-movable , Memoirs Amer. Math. Soc. 81 (1989), No. 411.
[BB] J. Brock & K. Bromberg, On the density of geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian groups , Acta Math. 192
(2004), no. 1, 33–93
[BBES] J. Brock, K. Bromberg, R. Evans & J. Souto, T ameness on the boundary and Ahlfors’ measure conjecture, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. No. 98 (2003), 145–166
[BCM] J. Brock, R. Canary & Y . Minsky , The classiﬁcation of Kleinian surface groups II: The ending lamination conjecture, eprint math.GT/0412006
[BS] J. Brock & J. Souto Algebraic limits of geometrically ﬁnite manifolds are tame , preprint.
[BF] E. Brown & C. D. Feustel, On properly embedding planes in arbitrary 3-manifolds , Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc., 94, 173–178.
[Caf] L. Caffarelli, Further regularity in the Signorini problem , Comm. in PDE 4 (1979), 1067–1076
[Ca] R. Canary , Ends of hyperbolic 3-manifolds , J. Amer. Math. Soc. 6 (1993), 1–35.
[Ca2] , A covering theorem for hyperbolic 3-manifolds and its appli cations, T opology, 35 (1996),
751–778.
[CaM] R. Canary & Y . N. Minsky , On limits of tame hyperbolic 3-manifolds and deformation th eory of
Kleinian groups, J. Diff. Geom. 43 (1996), 1–41.
[Car] L. Carleson, Selected problems on exceptional sets , Van Nostrand Mathematical Studies, 13
Princeton, (1967)
[CLLM] A. Champanerkar, J. Lewis, M Lipyanskiy & S. Meltzer, Exceptional regions and associated exceptional hyperbolic 3-manifolds, preprint.
[CiSc] H. Choi & R. Schoen, The space of minimal embeddings of a surface into a three-dimensional manifold
of positive Ricci curvature , Invent. Math. 81 (1985), 387–394
[CM] T. Colding & W . Minicozzi II, Minimal Surfaces, CIMS Lecture Notes 4 (1999).
[EM] D. Epstein & A. Marden, Convex hulls in hyperbolic space, a theorem of Sullivan, and measured
pleated surfaces, London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes, 111 (1986), 113–254.
[Ev] R. Evans, T ameness persists in weakly type-preserving limits , Amer. J. Math. 126 (2004), no. 4,
713–737
[Fed] H. Federer, Geometric measure theory , Springer–V erlag, Die Grundlehr. der math. Wiss. 153,
(1969).
[FF] B. Freedman & M. Freedman, Kneser-Haken ﬁniteness for bounded 3-manifolds locally fr ee groups,
and cyclic covers, Topology 37, (1998), 133–147.
[FHS] M. Freedman, J. Hass & P . Scott, Least area incompressible surfaces in 3-manifolds , Invent. Math.
71 (1983), no. 3, 609–642.
[Fre] J. Frehse, Two dimensional variational problems with thin obstacles , Math. Z. 143 (1975), 279–288
[G1] D. Gabai, Foliations and the topology of 3-manifolds , J. Diff. Geom. 18 (1983), 445–503.
[G2] D. Gabai, On the geometric and topological rigidity of hyperbolic 3-m anifolds, J. Amer. Math. Soc.
10 (1997), 37–74.
[GMT] D. Gabai, R. Meyerhoff & N. Thurston, Homotopy hyperbolic 3-manifolds are hyperbolic , Annals
of Math. 157 (2003), 335–431.
[Gr] M. Gromov , Metric structures for Riemannian and non–Riemannian space s, Birkhauser, Progress
in Mathematics 152 (1999)
[HS] J. Hass & P . Scott, The existence of least area surfaces in 3–manifolds , Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 310
(1988), 87–114
[Ha1] A. Hatcher, Homeomorphisms of sufﬁciently large P 2-irreducible 3-manifolds, Topology 15 (1976),
343–347.
[He] J. Hempel, 3–Manifolds Ann. of Math. Studies, 86 Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J.
[Jo] K. Johannson, Homotopy equivalences of 3-manifolds with boundaries, Springer LNM 761 (1979).
[JR] K. N. Jones & A. Reid, Vol3 and other exceptional hyperbolic 3-manifolds , Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
129 (2001), 2175-2185.
[Js] J. Jost, Riemannian Geometry and Geometric Analysis , Springer–V erlag, Berlin; 3rd edition (2002)
[K] D. Kinderlehrer, The smoothness of the solution of the boundary obstacle prob lem, J. Math. Pures et
Appl. 60 (1981), 193–212
[KS] G. Kleineidam & J. Souto, Ending laminations in the Masur domain , Kleinian Groups and Hyperbolic Manifolds, Proceedings, Cambridge University Pr ess, 2003.
60 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI
[Lew] H. Lewy , On the coincidence set in variational inequalities , J. Diff. Geom. 6 (1972) 497–501
[Li] M. Lipyanskiy , A computer assisted application of Poincare’s fundamental polyhedron theorem ,
preprint.
[Ma] A. Marden, The geometry of ﬁnitely generated Kleinian groups , Annals of Math. 99 (1974), 383–
462.
[Mv] A.I. Malcev , On isomorphic matrix representations of inﬁnite groups, Mat. Sb. (N. S.), 8 (50), (1940),
405–421.
[Mc] D. McCullough, Compact submanifolds of 3-manifolds with boundary , Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser.
(2), 37 (1986), 299–307.
[MMS] D. McCullough, A. Miller & G. A. Swarup, Uniqueness of cores of noncompact 3-manifolds , J.
London. Math. Soc., 52 (1985), 548–556.
[MSY] W . Meeks, L Simon & S.–T. Yau, Embedded minimal surfaces, exotic spheres, and manifolds w ith
positive Ricci curvature, Annals of Math. (2) 116 (1982), no. 3, 621–659
[MY] W . Meeks & S.–T. Yau, The classical Plateau problem and the topology of three-dimensional manifolds,
Topology 21 (1982), 409–442.
[Me] G. R. Meyerhoff, A lower bound for the volume of hyperbolic 3-manifolds , Canadian J. of Math. , 39
(1987), 1038–1056.
[Mi] Y . Minsky , The classiﬁcation of Kleinian surface groups I: Models and b ounds, eprint
math.GT/0302208
[Mo] J. Morgan, On Thurston’s uniformization for three-dimensional manif olds, The Smith Conjecture
(New York 1979), Academic Press, Mathematics 112, 37–138. page 71.
[Mor] C. B. Morrey Jr., Multiple integrals in the calculus of variations , Springer, (1966)
[Mw] G. Mostow , Quasiconformal mappings in n-space and the rigidity of hyperbolic space , Pubs. IHES
34 (1968), 53–104.
[My] R. Myers, End reductions, fundamental groups, and covering spaces of irreducible open 3-manifolds,
Geom. Topol. 9 (2005), 971–990
[N] J. Nitsche, Variational problems with inequalities as boundary condit ions or How to Fashion a Cheap
Hat for Giacometti’s Brother , Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 35 (1969), 83–113
[Oss] R. Osserman, A survey of minimal surfaces , Second edition. Dover Publications (1986)
[Re] Yu. Reshetnyak, Two-dimensional manifolds of bounded curvature, in Geometry IV, Encyclopaedia
of Mathematical Sciences, vol. 70, Springer-V erlag (1989), 3–165
[Ri] D. Richardson, Variational problems with thin obstacles, Thesis, UBC (1978)
[S] R. Schoen, Estimates for stable minimal surfaces in three dimensional manifolds, Annals of Math.
Stud. 103, (1983), 111–126.
[SY] R. Schoen and S.-T. Yau, Existence of incompressible minimal surfaces and the topol ogy of threedimensional manifolds with nonnegative scalar curvature , Ann. of Math. (2) 110, no. 1, (1979),
127–142
[Sc] G. P . Scott, Compact submanifolds of 3-manifolds , J. London. Math. Soc. 7 (1973), 246–250.
[Som] T. Soma, Existence of polygonal wrappings in hyperbolic 3–manifolds, preprint
[So] J. Souto, A note on the tameness of hyperbolic 3-manifolds , Topology ,44 (2005), no. 2, 459–474
[St] J. Stallings, On ﬁbering certain 3-manifolds , Topology of 3-manifolds and related topics,
Prentice-Hall, (1962), 95–100.
[T] W . P . Thurston, Geometry and topology of 3-manifolds, 1978 Princeton Math. Dept. Lecture Notes.
[T2]
, A norm for the homology of 3-manifolds , Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 59 (1986), no. 339,
99–130.
[Tu] T. Tucker, Non-compact 3-manifolds and the missing boundary problem , Topology ,13 (1974), 267–
273.
[Tu2] , On the Fox-Artin sphere and surfaces in noncompact 3-manifo lds, Quart. J. Math. Oxford
Ser. (2), 28 (1977), 243–253.
[V e] I. N. V ekua, Systems of differential equations of the ﬁrst order of ellip tic type and boundary value
problems, with an application to the theory of shells (Russi an) Mat. Sbornik N. S. 31 (73) (1952),
217–314.
[W a] F. W aldhausen, On irreducible 3-manifolds which are sufﬁciently large , Annals of Math. (2) 103
(1968), 56–88.
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS , CALTECH , PASADENA , CA 91125
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS , PRINCETON UNIVERSITY , PRINCETON , NJ 08544