(Brauer-Siegel Theorem for Tori) LetT be a torus of dimension d with minimal splitting ﬁeld K, and [K : Q] = n. Let hT,RT be the class number and regulator of T respectively. Also, let ρ be the associated integral representation of Gal (Q/ Q) and ρQ the induced rational representation. Let fρ be the norm of the Artin conductor corresponding to ρQ. Then we have 1 2 ln(hTRT ) = 1 2 lnfρ +on,d (lnDK) = ( 1 2 +on,d (1)) lnfρ Note that all the relevant tori for the study of CM points are c ompact at inﬁnity, and thus have no regulator. In this case, theorem 4.7 tells us precisely how large the class group is. The general setting we study in section 5 is the following: We are given tori T and S over Q, and a map φ :T → S between them. This induces a map of class groups ˜φ :ClT → CLS and our goal is to understand the size of the image of ˜φ , or more precisely to get a lower bound for it. One way to do this is to try and bound to rsion in class groups of Tori: suppose we knew that φ had an inverse up to isogeny, so that there is some map ψ : S → T with φ ◦ψ is the ×n map on T . BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 3 Then it follows from this that the image of ˜φ is at least the image of ×n map on ClS, and so it has size at least |ClS|/ |ClS [n]|. Now if we could just give a good bound for |ClS[n]| we would be done. Unfortunately, bounding torsion in class groups is a very hard problem in general. We t ake a more precise approach in section 5, which describes the size of th e cokernel of ˜φ in terms of the cokernel of the map on characters X(S) → X(T ) viewed as a Galois representation. A nice corollary of this approach is that it allows us to derive new transfer principles between torsion in class g roups of number ﬁelds, as is explained in section 6. The structure of this paper is as follows. In sections 2 and 3 w e give background about arithmetic tori, and recall Shyr’s formul a, which is the analogue for arithmetic Tori of Dirichlet’s class number fo rmula for number ﬁelds. In section 4 we use Shyr’s formula to prove the Brauer- Siegel Theorem for tori 4.7. Section 5 is the core of the paper, and it proves a structure theorem for maps between class groups of Tori. In section 6 we explain how one can use the results in Section 5 to derive transfer princi ples for torsion in ideal class groups of number ﬁelds, and give a new applicat ion relating 2torsion in quartic ﬁelds to 2-torsion in their cubic resolve nts. Finally, section 7 gives the promised applications to lower bounds of Galois o rbits of CM abelian varieties. 2. Preliminaries A Torus of dimension d over a ﬁeld k is an algebraic group T overk such thatT¯k is isomorphic to a power of the multiplicative algebraic gro up Gm,so that T¯k ≈ Gd m/ ¯k. Given a torus T of dimension d, we deﬁne its character group X(T ) to be Hom ¯k(T, Gm). Note that X(T ) is a free abelian group on d generators. X(T ) also acquires an action of the absolute Galois group Gk := Gal( ¯k/k ) via χσ (t) = χ (tσ − 1 )σ . The functor sending T to X(T ) is a contravariant category equivalence between Tori and torsion-free,ﬁnite ly generated Gkmodules. We say that a torus T splits over K if it is isomorphic to a power of Gm overK, or equivalently that X(T ) is a trivial module for the subgroup Gal(¯k/K ). We deﬁne C(K/k ) to be the set of all Tori over k which are split over K. Note that there is a minimal extension K of k over which T becomes split, and K is Galois over k. For each extension L of k, we deﬁne X(T )L to be the subgroup of X(T ) ﬁxed by Gal( ¯k/ (L ∩ ¯k)). If v is a place of k, we sometimes write X(T )v for X(T )kv . We shall require the following basic statement from the theo ry of integral representations of ﬁnite groups: Theorem 2.1. Let G be a ﬁnite group and ﬁx a positive integer d. Then there are only Od(1) integral representations of G of dimensions d up to isomorphism. 4 JACOB TSIMERMAN Proof. Suppose L is a d-dimensional integral representation of G. We wish to ﬁnd a G-invariant positive-deﬁnite inner product on L such that the nonzero vectors in L of smallest norm generate L. To show this is possible, ﬁx a G-invariant positive-deﬁnite inner product ⟨, ⟩1 onL, and consider the span M ⊂ L of the vectors of smallest norm. If M is not all of L, then we can consider the dual N of M with respect to ⟨, ⟩1. Both M and N are G-invariant, so we can ﬁnd a G-invariant inner product ⟨, ⟩2 which is trivial on M and positive-deﬁnite on N . By considering x⟨, ⟩1 + ⟨, ⟩2 for an appropriatex> 0, we can modify our inner product so as to strictly increase the set of non-zero vectors of smallest norm and also their sp an. Thus we can ﬁnd an inner product ⟨, ⟩ on L which is G-invariant and a basis v1,...,v n consisting of elements of L, such that (1) ∀i, ⟨vi,vi⟩ =y for some y >0 and the norm of any other non-zero vector in L is at least y. Let ˜L be the span of the vi (note that ˜L might not be G-invariant). By (1) the sphere of radius y/ 2 is contained in a fundamental domain for L, and the covolume of ˜L is at most yd. We thus have that the index [ L : ˜L], which is equal to the ratio of the covolumes, is at most 2d Vol (Sd) . Setting N = (2d)! we see that N ·L ⊂ ˜L. Now consider the matrix representation for an element g ∈ G w.r.t the basis for v1, · · ·vn. Set gvj = ∑ iaijvi. Since N ·L ⊂ ˜L we have aij ∈ Z[ 1 N ]. Since the norm of gv is also y, by considering the basis v1,...,v i− 1,gv,v i+1,...,v n and considering covolumes we conclude as above that |aij| ≤ N . Thus there are only Od(1) options for the representation of G on ˜L. Since there are only Od(1) options for L given ˜L, this completes the proof. □ In what follows, we write A for the Adele group, and Af for the ﬁnite Adeles. likewise, for a number ﬁeld K we write AK and AK f for the Adeles (resp. ﬁnite Adeles) over K. 3. Invariants of Arithmetic Tori In this section we deﬁne several invariants of arithmetic to ri