show that there is a proper isotopy of ∂W to∂W ′. Let N ǫ 0 denote a ﬁxed neutered space transverse to ∂W ′ and countably many ∂W t’s which converge to ∂W ′. Deﬁne ∂W ǫ t to be ∂W t∩ N ǫ 0 together with the disc components of ∂W t\N ǫ 0. Since areagt (∂W ǫ t ) is uniformly bounded, and the hyperbolic area form is dominated on all 2–planes by gt, the hyperbolic area of ∂W ǫ t is uniformly bounded. W e show that a disc D of ∂W t\N ǫ 0 cannot stray too far into the cusp and hence for all t, ∂W ǫ t ⊂ N η 0 for some sufﬁciently small η. Indeed, the lift ˜D to the universal cover ˜N ofN is an embedded disc of uniformly bounded area. If t is very close to 1, then dρ (∂N ǫ 0,∂N t 0) = dt > 0. If x∈ ˜D and SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 55 dρ (x,∂N ǫ 0∪ N t 0) = dt/ 2, then areaρ ( ˜D∩ (N ǫ 0− N t 0)) > πd2 t/ 4. Therefore, for t sufﬁciently large, ˜D and henceD has uniformly bounded ρ-diameter. Therefore, if ǫ < η, then the ∂W ǫ t ’s converge weakly to the surface N ǫ 0∩ W ′ which we deﬁne to be ∂W ′ ǫ. For t sufﬁciently large∂W ǫ t and∂W ′ ǫ are of the same topological type and very close geometrically . By Lemma 7.1 1,∂W ′ ǫ∩ N ǫ 0 has no components which can be homotoped rel boundary into ∂N ǫ 0, hence ∂W ǫ t shares the similar property . Since ∂W has no P -essential annuli disjoint from ∆1 it follows that each component of ∂W ǫ t\intN0 can be properly homotoped in ∂W ǫ t into an end of that surface. Therefore, if some non disc component of ∂W t− intN ǫ 0 was not a half open annulus, then one can ﬁnd a component E of∂W t∩ N ǫ 0 which can be homotoped rel ∂E into∂N ǫ 0, which is a contradiction. Note that ∂W ′ ǫ is of the same topological type as ∂W ∩ N0 and and that the ∂W ′ ǫ’s form an exhaustion of ∂W ′. By arguing as in the proof of Lemma 1.25, there exists a homot opy F : ∂W× I→ N with the property that F (∂W × 0) = ∂W , for inﬁnitely many t< 1,F (∂W× t) = ∂W t andF (∂W× 1) = ∂W ′. If∂W ′ intersects∂C in the subset S1× [s,∞ ) for some s, then for t sufﬁciently large∂W t must intersect ∂C in the subset S1× [s− ǫ,∞ ). Since projection to the barrier surface Hs− ǫ along horoannuli and horotori is area reducing, this implie s that∂W t∩C is contained in S1× [1,∞ )× [s− ǫ,∞ ), which in turn implies that W ′∩C⊂ S1× [1,∞ )× [s,∞ ). As in Lemma 2.3, the surfaces ∂W t converge on compact subsets to ∂W ′. The main results of§1 imply that ∂W ′ is ∆1–minimal. A similar argument proves similar facts about St,Tt andT ′. □ Let Gi denote in ∗ (π1(F )) ⊂ π1(Wi). Fix a basepoint f ∈ F . Let Xi denote the covering space of Wi (based at f ) with group Gi. The homotopy of Γi intoF supported inWi lifts toXi, hence provides us with a canonical ˆΓi of closed lifts of Γi in 1-1 correspondence with Γi. Since Wi is an atoroidal Haken manifold with nonzero Euler characteristic, it follows by Thurston that i nt(Xi) is topologically tame (see Proposition 3.2 [Ca]). By [Tu2] a compactiﬁcation ¯Xi of int(Xi) extends int(Xi)∪ ∂h ˆF∪ ∂p ˆF , where ˆF is the lift of F to Xi. Since ˆF is a core of ¯Xi it follows that ¯Xi is a union of a closed (possibly disconnected or empty) orien table surface× I with 1-handles attached to the surface× 1 side. Let ¯Si denote the unique boundary component of ¯Xi which is not a closed component of ˆF . Push ¯Si\int( ˆF∩ ∂ ¯Xi) slightly to obtain a properly embedded surface ˆSi⊂ Xi with∂ ˆSi =∂δ ˆF via a homotopy disjoint from ˆΓi. Being connected with the same Euler characteristic and same number of boundary components, ˆSi is of the same topological type as δF . Let ˆZ ′′ i ⊂ ¯Xi be the compact region with frontier ˆSi. Letχ :=|χ ( ˆSi)|=|χ (δF )|. Deﬁne∂pXi and∂hXi the respective preimages of ∂pWi and∂hWi. LetW ′ i denoteWi together with the components of N0\int(M ) which hit ∂W 1. Let Yi be the cover of W ′ i with π1(Yi) = Gi. As in the parabolic free case, Xi naturally embeds in Yi and the inclusion is a homotopy equivalence. Deﬁne ∂pYi to be the preimage of∂pW ′ i . Note that δWi, the frontier ofWi⊂ M equalsδW ′ i , the frontier ofW ′ i inN0. If possible compress ˆZ ′′ i along δ ˆZ ′′ i = ˆSi via compressions that hit ˆΓi at most once. Continue in this manner to obtain the region ˆZ ′ i whose frontier is 2-incompressible rel ˆBi := ˆΓi\{γi1,···,γ im} where both m and|χ (δ ˆZ ′ i)|≤ χ . Since Xi\ˆΓi is irreducible, we can assume that no component of ∂ ˆZ ′ i is a 2-sphere. 56 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Before we shrinkwrap δW ′ i and δ ˆZ ′ i we need to annulate them, i.e. compress them along essential annuli into P and ∂pYi. Geometrically we are eliminating accidental parabolics so that we can invoke Lemma 7.12. LetL1,···,L k be a maximal collection of pairwise disjoint, embedded, ess ential annuli in N0 disjoint from Γi such that for each j, ∂L j has one component onδW ′ i and one component on P . Furthermore assume that int (Li)∩ δW ′ i =∅. Now annulate δW ′ i along each Li to obtain the surface δW L i . So if Li lies to the outside of W ′ i , then the effect on Wi is to add N (Li). If Li⊂ W ′ i andLi× I is a product neighborhood, then this annulation deletesLi× int(I) fromW ′ i . There are no P -essential annuli for δW L i disjoint from Γi and ∂W L i is 2-incompressible rel Γi. Indeed, since δW L i is embedded and 2-incompressible, we need only consider embeddedP -essential annuli, by the generalized Loop theorem. The mod iﬁcation W ′ i→ W L i induces a modiﬁcation of Yi as follows. If Lj annulatesW ′ i to the outside, then enlarge Yi in the natural way . This will enlarge the parabolic boundary ∂pYi. If δW ′ i gets annulated to the inside, then do not change Yi. By abuse of notation, we relabel the space obtained from Yi as Yi. Let W l i denote Wi modiﬁed only along outer P -essential annuli. Note that Yi is a covering space of W l i . In like manner, annulateδ