This is enough to establish the existence of the tangent con e. □ Notice that Lemma 1.27 actually implies that T is a rectiﬁable surface in M , which is a local (topological) embedding. In particular, th is shows that the isotopy F :S× [0, 1)→ M constructed in Lemma 1.25 can be chosen to limit to a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M such thatF (S, 1) = T . 1.7. The thin obstacle problem. From the proof of Lemma 1.27, we see that T exists as a C0 map which by abuse of notation we denote u : T → M . One may immediately improve the regularity ofu. From the construction ofT , it is standard to show that u is actually in the Sobolev space H 1, 2 — that is, the derivative du is deﬁned, and is L2, in the sense of distribution; see [Mor] for a rigorous deﬁni tion of Sobolev spaces, and basic properties. T o see this, observe thatu is a limit of maps F (·,t i) : S→ M which are minimal for the gt metric, and therefore are L2 energy minimizers for the conformal structure onS pulled back by F (·,t i). If the set of conformal structures obtained in this way is precompact, one may extract a limit and therefore boun d theL2 norm ofdu in terms of the L2 norms of the derivatives of any F (·,t i). How can the sequence of conformal structures fail to be precompact? If and only if the conformal structures degenerate by a neck pinch. But the 2–incompressibility of S rel. Γ implies that there is a lower bound on the length of the image of any ess ential curve in S. It follows that the L2 norm of the derivative blows up along such a pinching neck, contrary to the energy minimizing property . So no such degen eration can occur, andu is inH 1, 2 as claimed. This argument is essentially contained in [SY] ( see e.g. Lemma 3.1, page 134), and one may consult this paper for detai ls. W e need to establish further regularity of du along Γ in the following sense. Recall that we are calling L := T∩ Γ the coincidence set. For each local sheet of T , we want u to be C1 along the interior of L from either side, and at a non–interior point ofL, we want u to beC1 on the nose. Now , ifI⊂ L is an interval, then the reﬂection principle (see [Oss]) imp lies that each local sheet T + ofT with∂T + =I can be analytically continued to a minimal surface across I, by taking another copy of T +, rotating it through angle π along the axisI and gluing it to the original T + alongI. It follows that du is real analytic from either side along the interior of L. Note that if the tangent cone at a point p is not literally a tangent plane, then an easy comparison argument implies that p is an interior point of the coincidence set. See [N] page 90 for a fuller discussion. Non–interior points of L are more difﬁcult to deal with, and we actually want to conclude thatdu is continuous at such points. Fortunately , this is a well–known problem in the theory of variational problems, known as the Signorini problem, or the (two dimensional) thin obstacle problem. In the literature, this problem is usually formulated in the following terms: SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 19 Thin Obstacle Problem. Let Ω be a bounded open subset of R2, andA an oriented line contained in Ω. Letψ :A→ R andg :∂Ω→ R be given, withg≥ ψ on∂Ω∩A. Deﬁne K ={v∈ g +H 1,p 0 |v≥ ψ onA} Minimize J(u) = ∫ F (x,u, ∇ u)dx overu∈ K. HereH 1,p denotes the usual Sobolev space over Ω for the Lp norm, with zero boundary conditions. The main conditions typically imposed on F are sufﬁcient regularity of F and its partial derivatives (Lipschitz is usually enough) and ellipticity, meaning that the matrix (Fik)i,k =1, 2 of the second partial derivatives of F (x,u,η ) with respect toη∈ R2 is uniformly positive deﬁnite on compact subsets of Ω× R2+1 (see [Fre] page 281 for details). Roughly speaking, F is elliptic if the critical functions of the functional J satisfy a “mean value property” — the value at each point is a weighted average of the value at nearby points. For example, if we want the graph of u to be a (Euclidean) minimal surface away from ψ (A), then the formula for F isF = (1 +|∇u|2)1/ 2 which is certainly real analytic and elliptic. The deﬁnition of F for a nonparametric minimal surface in exponential co–ordinates on hyperbolic space is more complicated, but certainly F is real analytic and elliptic in the sense of Frehse. See Figure 2 for an example of the graph of a function solving t he Dirichlet thin obstacle problem, whereψ|A is constant. This surface is visually indistinguishable from the graph of the function solving the unparameterized m inimal surface thin obstacle problem with the same boundary and obstacle data, b ut for computer implementation, the Dirichlet problem is less computation ally costly . The next theorem establishes not only the desired continuit y of∂u, but actually gives an estimate for the modulus of continuity . The followi ng is a restatement of Theorem 1.3 on page 26 of [Ri] in our context: Theorem 1.28 (Richardson [Ri] Regularity of thin obstacle). Letu be a solution to the thin obstacle problem for F elliptic in the sense of Frehse and p∈ [1,∞ ], and suppose that ∂Ω,ψ,g are smooth. Then ∂u is continuous along A in the tangent direction, one–sided continuous in the normal direction on either side, and conti nuous in the normal direction at a non–interior point. Furthermore, ∂u is H¨ older continuous, with exponent 1/ 2; i.e. the modulus of continuity of ∂u isO(t1/ 2). Remark 1.29. Note that C1+1/ 2 is actually best possible. Consider the function u : z→ Im(z3/ 2) for u∈ C slit along the positive real axis, where we take the branch which is negative sufﬁciently close to the slit. This solves a thin obstacle problem for the Dirichlet integral, and is only C1+1/ 2 atz = 0. Remark 1.30. For our applications, the fact thatu isC1+1/ 2 is more than necessary . In fact, all we use is that u isC1. This is proved (with a logarithmic modulus of continuity for du) by [Fre], and (with a H ¨ older modulus of continuity for du) in arbitrary dimension by [K]. W e apply this theorem to our context: 20 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI FIGURE 2. The graph of a function solving the thin obstacle problem Lemma 1.31 (Regularity along coincidence set) . Foru :T→ M deﬁned as above, the derivativedu along local sheets ofT is continuous from each side along the coincidence set L, and continuous at non–interior points. Proof. Ifp is an interior point of L, this follows by the reﬂection principle. Otherwise, by Lemma 1.27 and the discussion above, the