the characters χ N P(ew). The heart of the paper is Section 4, where we derive the diagonal asymptotics of the Szeg¨ o kernel (Theorem 4.1) for the spaces Poly( NP ), using our character formula from Section 3 as one of the ingredie nts. (Theorem 1.2 is an immediate consequence of Theorem 4.1.) Then apply ing our Szeg¨ o kernel asymptotics, we prove Theorems 1.1, 1.3 and 1.4 on the distribution of zeros in Sect ion 5. We also include an appendix (Section 6), where we describe an alternative geometric approach to our results using toric varieties. An index of notation is included at the end of the paper. Before embarking on the proofs, we comment on our borrowed ter minology from physics and on the role of toric geometry: 14 BERNARD SHIFFMAN AND STEVE ZELDITCH 1.4.1. Tunnelling of zeros. Some of the terminology we use—allowed and forbidden regions, mass density— is taken from the semiclassical analysis of ground states of Schr¨ o dinger operators Hℏ = − ℏ2∆ + V on Rn. The well-known ‘Agmon estimates’ of ground states (cf. [Ag]) sho w that L2-normalized ground states or low-lying eigenfunctions Hℏϕ = Eϕ of H are concentrated as ℏ → 0 in the classically allowed region CE = {x ∈ Rn : V (x) ≤ E} and |ϕ (x)|2 decays exponentially as ℏ → 0 for points x in the complement. In our setting, the Hamiltonian is ¯∂ ∗ ¯∂ on L2-sections of powers of the hyperplane section bundle on CPm, ℏ = 1/N , and the ground states are the holomorphic sections. Replacing |ϕ (x)|2 is the expected mass density |f (z)|2 FS of the polynomials in this subspace. Theorems 1.1–1.2 show that the N ewton-polytope constraint on the polynomials creates a ‘tunnelling theory’ for zeros and mass. The decay function bP in Theorem 1.2 is analogous to the Agmon action to the allowed region [A g]. We will also obtain (Proposition 5.3) the integral formula bP (z) = ∫ τz 0 [ −q(e− σ/ 2 ·z) +pµ (e− σ/ 2 ·z) ] ·dσ (38) (where ∫ τz 0 denotes the integral over any path in Rm from 0 to τz), which could be interpreted as an action, thereby bringing the results closer to classical Agmon estimates. 1.4.2. Role of toric varieties. Since Poly(NP ) is naturally isomorphic to the space H 0(MP,L P ) of holomorphic sections of a natural line bundle LP over a toric variety MP associated to P (see §6), the reader may wonder whether toric varieties play any role in this paper. The answe r is that neither the statements nor proofs of our results involve toric varieties in any essential way. Ho wever, the theory of these varieties does give an alternative approach to the asymptotics of the conditional Szeg¨ o kernel, as will be explained §6. It was also the approach in the original version of this paper [SZ2] and motivated some of the ideas. The reader may also wonder how the results of this paper would chan ge if, instead of deﬁning the Gaussian measuresγ|P to be the conditional measures of one ﬁxed ensemble, we deﬁned th e measures on Poly(NP ) ≃ H 0(MP,L N P ) to be the Gaussian measures γ MP N induced by the L2 inner product induced by a Hermitian metric on LP and its curvature form ω MP . As a special case of our results in [SZ1, Prop. 4.4], one obtains (under the added assumption that MP is smooth or maybe has orbifold singularities) 1 N k Eγ MP N (Zf1,...,f k ) = ω k MP +O ( 1 N ) = ( ∑m j=1dIj ∧ dθj ) k +O ( 1 N ) , (39) where Ij,θ j are the action-angle variables of the moment map µ P : MP → Rm of the Tm-action on MP . Related results in a somewhat diﬀerent set-up have also been obtain ed by Malajovich and Rojas [MR]. This quite diﬀerent law shows that the measures γ MP N are singular relative to γN p|N P in the limit as N → ∞ . As mentioned previously, the polytope P in this article is only used as a constraint on the polynomials in creating conditional measures. The norms of the monomials zα are ﬁxed (as their CPm norms). Thus, the change in the distribution of zeros as P varies is due solely to the choice of which monomials occur in the polynomials. In the case of γ MP N , the norms of the monomials vary as P varies since they are L2-normalized on the toric variety MP . Hence the variances of the coeﬃcients of a polynomial in the γ MP N ensembles depend on the choice of metric on LP . This dependence creates complicated biases towards some monom ials and away from others as P varies, making it diﬃcult to understand what a comparison between t he γ MP N ensembles would be measuring. In fact, our results using conditional measures also apply to polyto pes that are not convex and hence do not correspond to any toric variety. Indeed, suppose that P is a nonconvex ‘lattice’ polytope. Then Theorems 1.1–1.4 hold with the following modiﬁcations: The point q(z) satisfying (14)–(15) is not always unique; instead we choose q(z) to minimize bP (z). Then the function bP (z) is C0, not C1, and ψ P is a positive current, which has singular support. Part (iii) of Theorem 1.3 applies only to the absolutely continuous part ofψ P . More signiﬁcantly, the limit measure in Theorem 1.1 does not vanish on the forbidden region; instead, it is orthogonal to volume measure there. This observation is releva nt to the theory of ‘fewnomial’ systems, which we discuss in a forthcoming paper [SZ4]. 1.4.3. Acknowledgements. Our interest in polynomials with a ﬁxed Newton polytope was in part stim ulated by a discussion with A. Varchenko at the outset of this work. We wou ld like to thank M. Brion for many helpful comments regarding polytopes and the Euler-MacLaurin fo rmula. We also grateful to T. Theobald RANDOM POLYNOMIALS WITH PRESCRIBED NEWTON POLYTOPE 15 for giving us permission to use Figure 7 from his paper and A. Carass f or providing the illustrations in Figures 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 2. Background 2.1. F ans. By a convex integral polytope , we mean the convex hull in Rm of a ﬁnite set in the lattice Zm. A convex integral polytope P with nonempty interior P ◦ can be deﬁned by linear equations ℓj(x) := ⟨x,u j⟩ +λ j ≥ 0, (j = 1,...,d ), (40) where uj ∈ Zm is the primitive inward-pointing normal to the j-th facet (codimension-one face) F m− 1 j := {x ∈ P :ℓj(x) = 0, ℓk(x)> 0 for k ̸=j}. For each point x ∈ P , we consider the normal cone to P at x, Cx =CP x := {u ∈ Rm : ⟨u,x ⟩ = sup y∈ P ⟨u,y ⟩}, (41) which is a closed convex polyhedral cone. We decompose P into a ﬁnite union of faces, each face being an equivalence class under