idea is that while Yafaev used very small split primes to generate a large amount of class group elements, we use much larger split primes (a small power of the discrimina nt) to represent lots of distinct elements in the class group. Theorem 7.6. Assume GRH for CM ﬁelds. Then |im(˜rK )| ≫ g,ǫ D 1 2g2 −ǫ K . Proof. Let δ denote the element of Gal( L/ Q) representing complex conjugation. Consider unramiﬁed primes p,q which splits completely in K, and therefore also in L. Choose prime ideals P,Q in OL above p,q respectively, and suppose that rK (P ) = rK(Q) as elements of the ideal class group BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 23 CL(K). Then there is an element x ∈ K such that (x) = rK(P ) rK (Q), and hence (x/x δ) = rK (P )rK (Qδ) rK (Q)rK(Pδ) Since K is a primitive CM type and P and Q are totally split, x xδ must generate K over Q. Now, consider the element y = pqx xδ . Then y is an algebraic integer which generates K over Q. Moreover, all conjugates of y are of absolute value pq. Since Disc( Z[y]) ≥ DK we arrive at the inequality pq ≫ g D 1 g2 K . It follows that |im(rK )|> {#p | p splits completely in K and p ≪ g D 1 2g2 K }. Since GRH implies the existence of at least D 1 2g2 −ǫ K such primes, we are done. □ 7.4. Setting up the combinatorics. For eachg, deﬁne Wg to be the Weyl group of order g, which we will view as a group of signed permutations. That is, an element of Wg is a permutation σ inSg together with a choice, for each i, of sign σi. If σ (i) = j, then we see say that σ takes i to j with sign σi ∈ { +1, − 1}. We deﬁne composition by multiplying signs. That is, ( σ ◦τ)(i) = σ (τ(i)) and (σ ◦τ)i =στ(i) ·τi. It is convenient to use the following notation for an element of Wg: the element σ = (1+3− )(2− ) is used to denote the permutation (13)(2) which takes 1 to 3 with positive sign, 3 to 1 with negative sign and 2 to itself w ith negative sign. So for instance, σ 2 = (1− )(3− )(2+). Note that there is a map Wg → Sg taking a signed permutation to the underlying permutation, and this map is a surjective homomorphism. The kernel of this map will be den ote by W 0 g . ThusW 0 g is a normal subgroup of Wg isomorphic to ( Z/ 2Z)g. As before, Let (K, ΣK ) denote a CM ﬁeld of degree g together with a CM type (ΣK = (φ 1,...,φ g). Let L be the Galois closure of K, and G be the Galois group Gal(L/ Q). Let S ∈ Gal(L/ Q) denote all elements inducing an element of ΣK onK. We also let δ ∈ G be complex conjugation. Then G of L can canonically be viewed as a subgroup of Wg in the following way: For eachg ∈ G and 1 ≤ i ≤ g, we have that g(φi) is either φj for some j, or φj for some j. Thus, we can deﬁne σg to be the signed permutation mapping i to j with sign 1 if g(φi) = φj and sign -1 if g(φi) = φj. It is easy to see that this is an injective homomorphisms Gal( L/ Q)֒→Wg. It is worthwhile noting under this map complex conjugation always maps to the element 24 JACOB TSIMERMAN (1− )(2− )... (g− ). We assume wlog that φ 1 is the identity embedding on K. It is follows under this identiﬁcation that S consists of the set of all elements of G that send the element 1 to some j with sign 1, and thus S− 1 is the set of all elements which send some i to 1 with sign 1. Moreover, H is the subgroup of G which sends 1 to itself with sign 1. Since we assumed that the abelian variety A is simple, the right stabilizer of S in G must be H. 7.5. Understanding the map rK on Characters and cocharacters. Let us being by understanding the relevant G modules. A basis for X(K × ) is the set of all embeddings ψi : K → C, where the Galois action is given by composition: g(ψj) = g ◦ψj. Likewise, A basis for X(L× ) is the set of all embeddings ξj : L → C, where the Galois action is again given by composition. By ﬁxing an identity embedding֒→C we can consider the elementsg of G as a basis for X(L× ). The map ˆrK sends ψi to ˆrK (ψi) = ψi ◦   ∑ g∈S− 1 g   where we consider g now as an element of X(L× ). It will be more natural to consider the map on cocharacters for us. We take the dual ba ses g∗ for X(L× )∗ and ψ ∗ i for X(K × )∗. The dual map ˆrK ∗ takes an element g∗ to ˆrK ∗(g∗) = ∑ 1≤i≤g δ (1− σi) 2 (φ ∗ i ) where σ is the element of Wg corresponding to g− 1. That is, φ ∗ i appears in the sum if and only if g takes some element j to i with sign 1. Denote by L0 the kernel of the norm map NmL : L× → Q× and deﬁne K0 to be the kernel of the Norm map from K to its totally real subﬁeld F given by NmK/F (k) = k¯k. X(L0) is the quotient of X(L× ) by the primitive vector ∑ g∈Gg and X(L0)∗ is the submodule of X(L× )∗ consisting of all elements ∑ g∈Gag ·g∗ such that ∑ gag = 0. Similarly, X(K0) is the quotient of X(K × ) by the relationsφi = − ¯φi andX(K0)∗ is spanned by the elements π ∗ i :=φ ∗ i − ¯φ ∗ i, 1 ≤ i ≤ g. Note that rK takesL0 to K0. Deﬁne M to be the image of X(K0) in X(L0) by ˆrK and let TM be the torus whose character lattice is M . Lemma 7.7. We have DTM ≫ g D 1 2g− 1 K . Proof. Sincex corresponds to a simple abelian variety, the CM type (K, ΣK ) must be primitive and so the stabilizer of the element ∑ g∈S− 1(g − ¯g) in G is H. Note that this element lies in M . Since L is the Galois closure of K we know that H contains no non-trivial normal subgroup of G, so we see that the action of G on M has trivial kernel. The result then follows BRAUER-SIEGEL FOR TORI AND LOWER BOUNDS FOR CM GALOIS ORBITS 25 by considering the Artin conductor of the associated repres entation and applying Theorem 4.7 and Lemma 4.6. □ Note that TM (R) is compact, so TM has trivial regulator. In