and [So] it is now routine to obtain general theorems in the presence of parabolics from the corresponding results in the parabolic free case. W e now give the basic deﬁnitions and provide statements of ou r results in the parabolic setting. The following is well known, e.g. see [Ca] for an expanded ver sion of more or less the following discussion. Let N be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold, then for sufﬁciently small ǫ, the ǫ-thin part, N≤ ǫ ofN is a union of solid tori (Margulis tubes), rank-1 cusps and rank-2 cusps. Let N≥ ǫ denote N\int(N≤ ǫ). The space N ǫ 0 =N≥ ǫ∪ Margulis tubes is called the neutered space ofN , though we often drop theǫ. The parabolic locus ∂N ǫ 0 = P ǫ (usually just denoted P ) is a ﬁnite union of toriT1,···,T m and open annuli A1,···An. Each annulus Ai is of the form S1× R such that for t∈ R, each S1× t bounds a standard 2-dimensional cusp in N≤ ǫ. Let N 0 ≤ ǫ denote the cusp components of N≤ ǫ. By [Mc], N has a compact core C⊂ N0 which is also a core of N0 and the restriction to each component P ′ ofP is a core of P ′. Such a core for N0 is called a relative core. In particular if P ′ is an annulus, then we can assume that C∩ P ′ =S1× [t,s ]. By Bonahon [Bo], the ends ofN0 are in 1-1 correspondence with components of ∂C/P . If N = H3/ Γ, then an end of N0 is geometrically ﬁnite if it has a neighborhood disjoint from C(Γ)/ Γ, the convex core of N . Such an end has an exponentially ﬂaring geometry similar to that of a geometrically ﬁnite end of a parabolic free manifol d. The end E ofN0 is topologically tame if it is a relative product, i.e. there is a compact surface S and an embeddingS× [0,∞ )→ N0 which parametrizesE. If U is a neighborhood of E, then by passing to a smaller neighborhood we can assume that U∩ Ai is either∅ or of the form S1× (t,∞ ) orS1× ((−∞ ,s )∪ (t,∞ )). Adding the corresponding 2-dimensional cusps to S1× pts. we obtain UP the parabolic extension ofU . So if E is topologically tame, UP is topologically SP× [0,∞ ), where SP is topologically int(S) and geometricallyS with cusps added. Following [Bo] and [Ca] we say that the end E ofN0 is simply degenerate if it is topologically tame, has a neighborhoodU with a sequencefi :SP→ UP such that fi induces a CAT(− 1) structure onSP , thefi’s eventually miss given compact sets and eachfi is properly homotopic in UP to a homeomorphism of SP ontoSP× 0. W e say thatE is geometrically tame if it is simply degenerate or geometrically ﬁnite. The manifoldN is geometrically tame if each end of N0 is geometrically tame. Francis Bonahon showed that if ǫ is sufﬁciently small, then an end E of N ǫ 0 is geometrically inﬁnite if and only if there exists a sequence ∆ = {δi} of closed geodesics lying in N ǫ 0 and exitingE. W e can now state the general version of the results stated in t he introduction. Theorem 7.1. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group with neutered space N0. The endE ofN0 is simply degenerate if there exists a sequence of closed geodesics exiting the end. Theorem 7.2. A complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fu ndamental group is geometrically tame. Theorem 7.3. If N is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then each end of N0 is topologically tame. In particular, each end of N is topologically tame. 50 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Theorem 7.4. IfN = H3/ Γ is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then the limit set LΓ of Γ is either S2 ∞ or has Lebesgue measure zero. IfLΓ =S2 ∞ , then Γ acts ergodically on S2 ∞ . Theorem 7.5 (Classiﬁcation Theorem). IfN is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then N is determined up to isometry by its topological type, its parabolic structure, the conformal boundary ofN0’s geometrically ﬁnite ends and the ending laminations of N0’s geometrically inﬁnite ends. Theorem 7.6 (Density Theorem) . If N = H3/ Γ is a complete ﬁnitely generated 3manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then Γ is the algebraic limit of geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian groups. Theorem 7.7. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group and with associated neutered space N0. LetE be an end of N0 with relative compact core C. Let S be a compact surface with the topological type of δEC, the component of the frontier of C which facesE. Let UE denote a parabolic extension of a neighborhood ofE. If there exists a sequence of closed geodesics exiting E, then there exists a sequence{Si} of proper CAT(− 1) surfaces inUP homeomorphic to int (S) which eventually miss every compact set and such that each Si∩ N0 homologically separatesC fromE. Furthermore, ifSi∩ N0 lies to theE side of C, then no accidental parabolic α⊂ Si∩ N0 can be homotoped into a cusp via a homotopy disjoint from C. Remarks 7.8. (1) Theorem 7.7 is the main technical result of this section a nd at the end of this section we will deduce from it Theorems 7.1 a nd 7.3. (2) Theorem 7.3 has been independently proven by Agol [Ag]. (3) Theorem 7.1 implies Theorem 7.2 as follows. A complete hy perbolic 3manifold is geometrically tame if each end of N0 is either geometrically ﬁnite or simply degenerate. By deﬁnition, ends of N0 are either geometrically ﬁnite or geometrically inﬁnite. Using Bonahon’s char acterization of geometrically inﬁnite ends and Theorem 7.1 it follows that g eometrically inﬁnite ends are simply degenerate. (4) Theorem 7.4 immediately follows from Theorem 7.2 by the w ork of Thurston [T] and Canary [Ca]. It also follows from [Ca] that the variou s results of§9 [Ca] hold for N . (5) Theorem 7.3 is the last step needed to prove the monumenta l classiﬁcation theorem, the other parts being established by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky , Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kelineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire– Ohshika, Hossein–Souto and Rees. See [Mi] and [BCM]. (6) The Density Theorem was conjectured by Bers, Sullivan an d Thurston. Theorem 7.3 is one of very many results, many of them recent, n eeded to build a proof. Major contributions were made by Alhfors, Ber s, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky , Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kelineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire– Ohshika, Hossein–Souto, Rees, Bromberg and Brock–Bromber g. (7) The rest of this section is devoted to proving Theorems 7. 7, 7.1 and 7.3. Given the manifold N with neutering N0 and endE ofN0 we explain how to ﬁnd a relative end-manifoldM containingE. Deﬁnition 7.9. If A is a cod-0 submanifold of a manifold with boundary , then the frontierδA ofA is the closure of ∂A− ∂M . If (R,∂R )⊂ (N0,P )