deformed metrics gt have the following properties: Lemma 1.18 (Metric properties). Thegt metric satisﬁes the following properties: (1) For each t there is an f (t) satisfyingr(1− t)/ 4<f (t)< 3r(1− t)/ 4 such that the union of tori ∂N f (t)(Γ) are totally geodesic for the gt metric (2) For each component γi and each t, the metric gt restricted to Nr(γi) admits a family of isometries which preserve γi and acts transitively on the unit normal bundle (inM ) toγi (3) The area of a disk cross–section on Nr(1− t) isO((1− t)2). (4) The metric gt dominates the hyperbolic metric on 2–planes. That is, for all 2– vectorsν, thegt area ofν is at least as large as the hyperbolic area of ν Proof. Statement (2) follows from the fact that the deﬁnition of gt has the desired symmetries. Statements (3) and (4) follow from the fact that the ratio of the gt metric to the hyperbolic metric is pinched between 1 and 3. Now , a radially symmetric circle linking Γ of radius s has length 2π cosh(s) in the hyperbolic metric, and therefore has length 2π cosh(s)(1 + 2φ(s/r (1− t))) 10 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI in the gt metric. For sufﬁciently small (but ﬁxed) r, this function of s has a local minimum on the interval [r(1− t)/ 4, 3r(1− t)/ 4]. It follows that the family of radially symmetric tori linking a component of Γ has a local minimum for area in the interval [r(1− t)/ 4, 3r(1− t)/ 4]. By property (2), such a torus must be totally geodesic for the gt metric. □ Notation 1.19. W e denote length of an arcα :I→ M with respect to the gt metric as lengtht(α (I)), and area of a surface ψ :R→ M with respect to the gt metric as areat(ψ (R)). 1.5. Constructing the homotopy . As a ﬁrst approximation, we wish to construct surfaces in M\Γ which are globally least area with respect to the gt metric. There are various tools for constructing least area surfaces in Ri emannian 3-manifolds under various conditions, and subject to various constrain ts. Typically one works in closed 3-manifolds, but if one wants to work in 3-manifolds with boundary , the “correct” boundary condition to impose is mean convexity . A co-oriented surface in a Riemannian 3-manifold is said to be mean convex if the mean curvature vector of the surface always points to the negative side of the su rface, where it does not vanish. T otally geodesic surfaces and other minimal sur faces are examples of mean convex surfaces, with respect to any co-orientation. S uch surfaces act as barriers for minimal surfaces, in the following sense: suppose thatS1 is a mean convex surface, and S2 is a minimal surface. Suppose further that S2 is on the negative side of S1. Then if S2 andS1 are tangent, they are equal. One should stress that this barrier property is local. See [MSY] for a more thorough discussion of barrier surfaces. Lemma 1.20 (Minimal surface exists) . Let M, Γ,S be as in the statement of Theorem 1.10. Let f (t) be as in Lemma 1.18, so that ∂N f (t)(Γ) is totally geodesic with respect to the gt metric. Then for each t, there exists an embedded surface St isotopic in M\Nf (t)(Γ) toS, and which is globally gt–least area among all such surfaces. Proof. Note that with respect to the gt metrics, the surfaces ∂N f (t)(Γ) described in Lemma 1.18 are totally geodesic, and therefore act as barrie r surfaces. W e remove the tubular neighborhoods of Γ bounded by these totally geodesic surfaces, and denote the result M\Nf (t)(Γ) byM ′ throughout the remainder of this proof. W e assume, after a small isotopy if necessary , that S does not intersect Nf (t) for any t, and therefore we can (and do) think of S as a surface in M ′. Notice that M ′ is a complete Riemannian manifold with totally geodesic bounda ry . W e will construct the surfaceSt inM ′, in the same isotopy class as S (also inM ′). If there exists a lower bound on the injectivity radius in M ′ with respect to the gt metric, then the main theorem of [MSY] implies that either su ch a globally least area surface St can be found, or S is the boundary of a twisted I–bundle over a closed surface in M ′, or else S can be homotoped off every compact set in M ′. First we show that these last two possibilities cannot occur. IfS is nonseparating inM , then it intersects some essential loop β with algebraic intersection number 1. It follows that S cannot be homotoped off β , and does not bound an I–bundle. Similarly , ifγ1,γ 2 are distinct geodesics of Γ separated from each other by S, then theγi’s can be joined by an arc α which has algebraic intersection number 1 with the surface S. The same is true of any S′ homotopic to S; it follows that S cannot be homotoped off the arc α , nor does it bound an I–bundle disjoint from Γ, and therefore does not bound an I–bundle inM ′. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 11 Now suppose that the injectivity radius on M ′ is not bounded below . W e use the following trick. Let g′ t be obtained from the metric gt by perturbing it on the complement of some enormous compact regionE so that it has a ﬂaring end there, and such that there is a barrierg′ t-minimal surface close to∂E , separating the complement ofE inM ′ fromS. Then by [MSY] there is a globally g′ t least area surface S′ t, contained in the compact subset of M ′ bounded by this barrier surface. Since S′ t must either intersect β orα , by the Bounded Diameter Lemma 1.15, unless the hyperbolic area of S′ t∩ E is very large, the diameter of S′ t in E is much smaller than the distance from α orβ to∂E . Since by hypothesis, S′ t is least area for the g′ t metric, its restriction to E has hyperbolic area less than the hyperbolic area of S, and therefore there is an a priori upper bound on its diameter in E. By choosing E big enough, we see that S′ t is contained in the interior of E, wheregt andg′ t agree. ThusS′ t is globally least area for the gt metric in M ′, and therefore St = S′ t exists for anyt. □ The bounded diameter lemma easily implies the following: Lemma 1.21 (Compact set). There is a ﬁxed compact set E⊂ M such that the surfaces St constructed in Lemma 1.20 are all contained in E. Proof. Since the hyperbolic areas of the St are all uniformly bounded (by e.g. the hyperbolic area of S) and are 2–incompressible rel. Γ, they have uniformly bounded diameter away from Γ outside of Margulis tubes. Since for homological reasons they must intersect the compact sets α or β , they can intersect at most ﬁnitely