they have th e desired escaping and homological properties. Fixi. If possible, compress S× i, via a compression which either misses ∆ or crosses ∆ once say atδi1⊂ ∆i. If possible, compress again via a compression meeting ∆\δi1 at most once say atδi2⊂ ∆i. After at mostn≤ 2g− 2 such operations and deleting 2-spheres we obtain embedded connected surfaces Si 1,···,S i ir , none of which is a 2–sphere and each of which is 2–incompressible rel ∆i+1\{δi1∪···∪δin}. For each ﬁxed i, eachδj (j≤ i) with at most 2g− 2 exceptions is separated fromE by exactly one surface Si k. Call Bagi k the region separated fromE bySi k. Note that all compressions in the passage of Si to{Si 1,···,S i ir} are on the nonE-side. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 31 Since each ir ≤ g, we can ﬁnd a p ∈ N and for each i, a reordering of the Si j’s (and their bags) so that for inﬁnitely many i≥ p,δp∈ Bagi 1; furthermore, if for each i such that δp ∈ Bagi 1, we denote by p(i) the maximal index such that δp(i) ∈ Bagi 1, then the set {p(i)} is unbounded. By Theorem 0.8, Si 1 is homotopic rel ∆i+1\{δi1,···,δ in} to a CAT (− 1) surfaceSi. Since the collection {α p(i)} is inﬁnite and locally ﬁnite, the Bounded Diameter Lemma imp lies that a subsequence of these Si 1’s must exit E. Call this subsequence T1,T 2,···, whereTi is the shrinkwrappedSni 1 . Therefore, fori sufﬁciently large,Ti must lie inS× (p,∞ ) and ⟨Ti,α p⟩ =⟨Sni 1 ,α p,⟩ = 1 . Therefore, projection of Ti toS× p is degree 1. This in turn implies that genus Ti =g andTi can be homotoped withinE to a homeomorphism ontoS× 0. See Figure 5 for another schematic view . □ Remark 4.2. This argument shows that for i sufﬁciently large,S× i is already 2– incompressible inN\∆i. Also, given anyη-separated collection of exiting geodesics a sufﬁciently large ﬁnite subset is 2-disc busting. Actuall y using the technology of the last chapter, this statement holds for any sequence of ex iting closed geodesics. The proof of Theorem 0.9 follows a similar strategy . Here is t he outline in the case thatN has a single endE and no parabolics. Given a sequence of η-separated exiting simple closed geodesics ∆ = {δi} we pass to subsequence (and possibly choose δ1 to have ﬁnitely many components) and ﬁnd a sequence of connec ted embedded surfaces denoted{∂W i} such that for each i, ∂W i separates ∆i =δ1∪ δ2∪···∪ δi from ∆− ∆i and is 2-incompressible rel ∆i. It is a priori possible that the∂W i’s do not exit E. If Wi denotes the compact region split off by ∂W i, then after possibly deleting an initial ﬁnite set of Wi’s (and adding the associated δi’s to δ1) we ﬁnd a compact 3-manifold D⊂ W1 which is a core forW =∪Wi. W e next ﬁnd an immersed genus≤ g surfaceTi, which homologically separates off a subset Bi of ∆i fromE. For inﬁnitely many i,Bi includes a ﬁxed δp and for thesei’s the set {p(i)} is unbounded, where p(i) is the largest index of a δk⊂ Bi. The surface Ti separatesBi from the rest in the sense that Ti lifts to an embedded surface ˆTi in the π1(D)-cover ˆWi of Wi and in that cover ˆTi separates a lift ˆBi from∂ ˆWi, the preimage of ∂W i. The argument to this point is purely topological and applies to any 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundam ental group. In the general case,{∂W i} will not be an exiting sequence. Next we shrinkwrap ∂W i rel ∆i+1 to a CAT(− 1) surface which we continue to call ∂W i. Then we homotop ˆTi rel ˆ∆i to a CAT (− 1) surface in the induced ˆWi and let Ti denote the projection of Ti to N . The point of shrinkwrapping ∂W i is that ∂ ˆWi is now a barrier which prevents ˆTi from popping out of ˆWi during the subsequent shrinkwrapping (compare with §2). W e use the δp(i)’s to show that, after passing to a subsequence, the Ti’s exit E. W e use δp to show that for i sufﬁciently large,Ti homologically separatesE from a Scott core of N . W e have outlined the strategy . For purposes of exposition, t he construction of theTi’s in §6 is slightly different from the sketch above. In§7 we make the necessary embellishments to handle the parabol ic case. The next chapter develops the theory of end reductions which enables us to deﬁne the submanifolds Wi. 32 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Core of N S × 0 S × i δp δp(i) δi+1 αp αp(i) 0 and 1 compress S × i to get the Si j Si 1 Si 2 Si 3 Bagi 1 Bagi 2 Bagi 3 Ti Ti Shrinkwrap Si 1 to get T i Actual picture FIGURE 5. The Bounded Diameter Lemma and the intersection number argument show that S× i undergoes no compression, andTi actually separates all of ∆i fromE. 5. E ND MANIFOLDS AND END REDUCTIONS In this section, we prove a structure theorem for the topolog y of an end of a 3–manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. A refe rence for basic 3– manifold topology is [He]. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 33 The ﬁrst step is to replace our original manifold with a 1–ended manifold M with the homotopy type of a bouquet of circles and closed orie ntable surfaces. W e then prove Theorem 5.21, the inﬁnite end engulﬁng theorem, which says that given an exiting seqence of homotopically non trivial simple closed curves we can pass to a subsequence Γ and ﬁnd a submanifold W, with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, containing Γ which has the following properties: (1)W can be exhausted by codimension 0 compact submanifolds Wi whose boundaries are 2–incompressible rel Γ∩ Wi. (2)W has a core which lies in W1. This completes the preliminary step in the proof of Theorem 0 .9, as explained at the end of§4. The proof of Theorem 0.9 itself is in §6. In what follows we will assume that all 3-manifolds are orien table and irreducible. Lemma 5.1. IfE is an end of an open Riemannian 3-manifold M ′ with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, thenE is isometric to the end of a 1-ended 3-manifold M whose (possibly empty) boundary is a ﬁnite union of closed orienta ble surfaces. A core of M is obtained by attaching 1-handles to the components of ∂M , unless∂M =∅, in which case a core is a 1-complex and M =M ′. Proof. A thickened Scott coreC [Sc] ofM ′ is a union of 1-handles (possibly empty) attached to a compact 3-manifoldX with incompressible boundary . SplitM ′ along all the boundary components of X and let M be the component which contains E. □ Remark 5.2. M is a submanifold of M ′.M is isometric to a submanifold ˆM of the covering ofM ′ corresponding to the inclusionπ1(M )→ π1(M ′), and the inclusion M→ ˆM is a homotopy equivalence. Deﬁnition 5.3. Call a ﬁnitely