to patch this partial isotopy together with a partial isotop y supported in a small neighborhood ofNǫ(Γ) to deﬁne the correct isotopy from Sti toSti+1. Let Z be obtained from Nǫ(Γ) by isotoping it slightly into M\Nǫ(Γ) so that it is transverse to T , and therefore also to Sti fori sufﬁciently large. For each i, we consider the intersection τi =Sti∩ ∂Z and observe that the limit satisﬁes lim i→∞ τi =τ =T∩ ∂Z Let σ be a component of τ which is inessential in ∂Z . Then for large i, σ can be approximated by σi ⊂ τi which are inessential in ∂Z . Since the Sti are 2– incompressible rel. Γ, the loops σi must bound subdisks Di ofSti. Since ∂Z is a convex surface with respect to the hyperbolic metric, and th egt metric agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Z for larget, it follows that the disks Di are actually contained inZ\Γ for largei. It follows that Di andDi+1 are isotopic by an isotopy supported inZ\Γ, which restricts to a very small isotopy of σi toσi+1 in∂Z . Let σ be a component of τ which is essential in ∂Z . Then so is σi for large i. Again, since S, and therefore Sti is 2–incompressible rel. Γ, it follows that σi cannot be a meridian of ∂Z , and must actually be a longitude. It follows that there is another essential curve σ ′ i in each τi, such that the essential curves σ ′ i and σi 14 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI cobound a subsurface Ai inSti∩ Z\Γ. After passing to a diagonal subsequence, we can assume that the σ ′ i converge to some component σ ′ ofτ. By 2–incompressibility , the surfacesAi are annuli. Note that there are two relative isotopy classes of such annuli. By passing to a further d iagonal subsequence, we can assume Ai andAi+1 are isotopic in Z\Γ by an isotopy which restricts to a very small isotopy of σi∪ σ ′ i toσi+1∪ σ ′ i+1 in∂Z . W e have shown that for any smallǫ and any sequenceSti, there is an arbitrarily large index i and inﬁnitely many indices j withi < jso that the surfaces Sti and Stj are isotopic, and the isotopy can be chosen to have the follow ing properties: (1) The isotopy takes Nǫ(Γ)∩ Sti to Nǫ(Γ)∩ Stj by an isotopy supported in Nǫ(Γ). (2) Outside Nǫ(Γ), the tracks of the isotopy are contained in ﬁbers of the exponentiated normal bundle of T ′\Nǫ(Γ). Choose a sequence ǫi→ 0, and pick a subsequence of the Sti’s and relabel so that Sti,S ti+1 satisfy the properties above with respect toNǫi(Γ). Then the composition of this inﬁnite sequence of isotopies is F . □ Remark 1.26. The reason for the circumlocutions in the statement of Lemma 1.25 is that we have not yet proved that T is a limit of the St as maps fromS toM . This will follow in §1.6, where we analyze the structure of T near a point p∈ Γ, and show it has a well–deﬁned tangent cone. 1.6. Existence of tangent cone. W e have constructedT as a subset ofM , and have observed that away from Γ,T is a minimal surface for the hyperbolic metric. W e refer to the intersection T∩ Γ as the coincidence set. In general, one cannot expect T to be smooth along the coincidence set. However, we show that it does have a well-deﬁned tangent cone in the sense of Gromov , and this tangent cone is in fact of a very special form. In particular, this is enough to imply that T exists as the image of a map from S toM , and we may extend the isotopy F :S× [0, 1)→ M to a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M withT =F (S, 1). By a tangent cone we mean the following: at each point p∈ T∩ Γ, consider the pair of metric spaces (Ns(p),T s(p)) whereTs(p) is the intersection Ts = T∩ Ns(p). W e rescale the metric on this pair by the factor 1/s . Then we claim that this sequence of (rescaled) pairs of metric spaces converge in th e Gromov-Hausdorff sense to a limit (B,C ) where B is the unit ball in Euclidean 3-space, and C is the cone (to the origin) over a great bigon in the unit sphere. Here by a great bigon we mean the union of two spherical geodesics joining antipod al points in the sphere. In fact we do not quite show that T has this structure, but rather that each local branch of T has this structure. Here we are thinking of the map F (·, 1) : S→ M whose image is T , and by “local branch” we mean the image of a regular neigborhood of a point preimage. Lemma 1.27 (T angent cone). LetT be as constructed in Lemma 1.24. Let p∈ T∩ Γ. Then near p, T is a (topologically immersed) surface, each local branch of which has a well–deﬁned tangent cone, which is the cone on a great bigon. Proof. W e use what is essentially a curve–shortening argument. For each small s, deﬁne Ts =∂N s(p)∩ T SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 15 For each point q∈ T\Γ, we deﬁne α (q) to be the angle between the tangent space to T at q, and the radial geodesic through q emanating from p. By the coarea formula, we can calculate area(T∩ Ns(p)) = ∫ s 0 ∫ Tt 1 cos(α )dldt≥ ∫ s 0 length(Tt)dt wheredl denotes the length element in each Tt. Note that this estimate implies thatTt is rectiﬁable for a.e. t. W e chooses to be such a rectiﬁable value. Now , each component τ of Ts is a limit of components τi of Sti∩ ∂N s(p) for largei. By 2–incompressibility of the Sti , each τi is a loop bounding a subdisk Di ofSti for largei. Now ,∂N s(p) is convex in the hyperbolic metric, though not necessarily i n the gt metric. By cutting out the disks ∂N s(p)∩ Nr(1− t)(Γ) and replacing them with the disks D± orthogonal to Γ which are totally geodesic in both the gt and the hyperbolic metrics, we can approximate ∂N s(p) by a surface ∂B bounding a ball B⊂ Ns(p) which is convex in the gs metric for all s≥ t. The ball B is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Ns(p) D±Γ B FIGURE 1. The ball B has boundary which is convex in both the hyperbolic and the gs metrics for all s≥ t Note that after liftingB to the universal cover, there is a retraction ontoB which is length non-increasing, in both the gt and the hyperbolic metric. This retraction projects along the ﬁbers of the product structure on Nr(1− t)(Γ) toD± , and outside Nr(1− t)(Γ), it is the nearest point projection to ∂B\D± . Letτ′ i be the component ofSti∩∂B approximatingτi, and letD′ i be the subdisk ofSti which it bounds. Then the disk D′ i must be contained in B, or else we could decrease its gt and hyperbolic area by the