of simple closed curves is said to be 2–incompressible rel. Γ if any essential compressing disk for S must intersect Γ in at least two points. If Γ is understood, we say S is 2–incompressible. Theorem 1.10 (Existence of shrinkwrapped surface). LetM be a complete, orientable, parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in M . Further, let S⊂ M\Γ be a closed embedded 2–incompressible surface rel. Γ which is either nonseparating in M or separates some component of Γ from another. ThenS is homotopic to a Γ–minimal surfaceT via a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M such that (1) F (S× 0) = S (2) F (S× t) = St is an embedding disjoint from Γ for 0≤ t< 1 (3) F (S× 1) = T (4) IfT ′ is any other surface with these properties, then area (T )≤ area(T ′) We say that T is obtained from S by shrinkwrapping rel. Γ, or if Γ is understood, T is obtained fromS by shrinkwrapping. The remainder of this section will be taken up with the proof o f Theorem 1.10. Remark 1.11. In fact, for our applications, the property we want to use of o ur surface T is that we can estimate its diameter (rel. the thin part of M ) from its Euler characteristic. This follows from a Gauss–Bonnet est imate and the bounded diameter lemma (Lemma 1.15, to be proved below). In fact, our argument will show directly that the surface T satisﬁes Gauss–Bonnet; the fact that it is CAT (− 1) is logically superﬂuous for the purposes of this paper. 1.4. Deforming metrics along geodesics. Deﬁnition 1.12 (δ–separation). Let Γ be a collection of disjoint simple geodesics in a Riemannian manifold M . The collection Γ isδ–separated if any path α : I→ M with endpoints on Γ and satisfying length(α (I))≤ δ 8 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI is homotopic rel. endpoints into Γ. The supremum of such δ is called the separation constant of Γ. The collection Γ is weaklyδ–separated if dist(γ,γ ′)>δ wheneverγ,γ ′ are distinct components of Γ. The supremum of such δ is called the weak separation constant of Γ. Deﬁnition 1.13 (Neighborhood and tube neighborhood) . Letr >0 be given. For a point x∈ M , we let Nr(x) denote the closed ball of radius r about x, and let N<r(x),∂N r(x) denote respectively the interior and the boundary of Nr(x). For a closed geodesic γ inM , we let Nr(γ) denote the closed tube of radius r aboutγ, and letN<r(γ),∂N r(γ) denote respectively the interior and the boundary ofNr(γ). If Γ denotes a union of geodesics γi, then we use the shorthand notation Nr(Γ) = ⋃ γ i Nr(γi) Remark 1.14. T opologically ,∂N r(x) is a sphere and ∂N r(γ) is a torus, for sufﬁciently small r. Similarly ,Nr(x) is a closed ball, and Nr(γ) is a closed solid torus. If Γ isδ–separated, thenNδ/ 2(Γ) is a union of solid tori. Lemma 1.15 (Bounded Diameter Lemma). LetM be a complete hyperbolic 3–manifold. Let Γ be a disjoint collection of δ–separated embedded geodesics. Let ǫ >0 be a Margulis constant for dimension 3, and letM≤ ǫ denote the subset of M where the injectivity radius is at most ǫ. If S⊂ M\Γ is a 2–incompressible Γ–minimal surface, then there is a constantC =C(χ (S),ǫ,δ )∈ R andn =n(χ (S),ǫ,δ )∈ Z such that for each component Si ofS∩ (M\M≤ ǫ), we have diam(Si)≤ C Furthermore,S can only intersect at most n components ofM≤ ǫ. Proof. Since S is 2–incompressible, any point x∈ S either lies in M≤ ǫ, or is the center of an embedded m–disk inS, where m = min(ǫ/ 2,δ/ 2) Since S is CAT(− 1), Gauss–Bonnet implies that the area of an embedded m– disk inS has area at least 2π (cosh(m)− 1)>πm 2. This implies that if x∈ S∩ M\M≤ ǫ then area(S∩ Nm(x))≥ πm 2 The proof now follows by a standard covering argument. □ A surfaceS satisfying the conclusion of the Bounded Diameter Lemma is s ometimes said to have diameter bounded by C moduloM≤ ǫ. Remark 1.16. Note that if ǫ is a Margulis constant, then M≤ ǫ consists of Margulis tubes and cusps. Note that the same argument shows that, away from the thin part ofM and anǫ neighborhood of Γ, the diameter of S can be bounded by a constant depending only on χ (S) andǫ. The basic idea in the proof of Theorem 1.10 is to search for a le ast area representative of the isotopy class of the surface S, subject to the constraint that the track of this isotopy does not cross Γ. Unfortunately ,M\Γ is not complete, so the prospects for doing minimal surface theory in this manifold are remote. T o remedy this, we deform the metric on M in a neighborhood of Γ in such a way that SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 9 we can guarantee the existence of a least area surface repres entative with respect to the deformed metric, and then take a limit of such surfaces under a sequence of smaller and smaller such metric deformations. W e describe the deformations of interest below . In fact, for technical reasons which will become apparent in §1.8, the deformations described below are not quite adequate for our purpo ses, and we must consider metrics which are deformed twice — ﬁrstly , a mild deformation which satisﬁes curvature pinching − 1 ≤ K ≤ 0, and which is totally Euclidean in a neighborhood of Γ, and secondly a deformation analogous to the kind described below in Deﬁnition 1.17, which is supported in this totally E uclidean neighborhood. Since the reason for this “double perturbation” will n ot be apparent until §1.8, we postpone discussion of such deformations until that time. Deﬁnition 1.17 (Deforming metrics) . Let δ > 0 be such that Γ is δ–separated. Choose some smallr withr<δ/ 2. Fort∈ [0, 1) we deﬁne a family of Riemannian metricsgt onM in the following manner. The metrics gt agree with the hyperbolic metric away from some ﬁxed tubular neighborhood Nr(Γ). Let h :Nr(1− t)(Γ)→ [0,r (1− t)] be the function whose value at a point p is the hyperbolic distance from p to Γ. W e deﬁne a metric gt on M which agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Nr(1− t)(Γ), and on Nr(1− t)(Γ) is conformally equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, as follows. Let φ : [0, 1]→ [0, 1] be a C∞ bump function, which is equal to 1 on the interval [1/ 3, 2/ 3], which is equal to 0 on the intervals [0, 1/ 4] and [3/ 4, 1], and which is strictly increasing on [1/ 4, 1/ 3] and strictly decreasing on [2/ 3, 3/ 4]. Then deﬁne the ratio gt length element hyperbolic length element = 1 + 2φ ( h(p) r(1− t) ) W e are really only interested in the behaviour of the metrics gt as t→ 1. As such, the choice of r is irrelevant. However, for convenience, we will ﬁx some smallr throughout the remainder of§1. The