i} will not be an exiting sequence. Next we shrinkwrap ∂W i rel ∆i+1 to a CAT(− 1) surface which we continue to call ∂W i. Then we homotop ˆTi rel ˆ∆i to a CAT (− 1) surface in the induced ˆWi and let Ti denote the projection of Ti to N . The point of shrinkwrapping ∂W i is that ∂ ˆWi is now a barrier which prevents ˆTi from popping out of ˆWi during the subsequent shrinkwrapping (compare with §2). W e use the δp(i)’s to show that, after passing to a subsequence, the Ti’s exit E. W e use δp to show that for i sufﬁciently large,Ti homologically separatesE from a Scott core of N . W e have outlined the strategy . For purposes of exposition, t he construction of theTi’s in §6 is slightly different from the sketch above. In§7 we make the necessary embellishments to handle the parabol ic case. The next chapter develops the theory of end reductions which enables us to deﬁne the submanifolds Wi. 32 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Core of N S × 0 S × i δp δp(i) δi+1 αp αp(i) 0 and 1 compress S × i to get the Si j Si 1 Si 2 Si 3 Bagi 1 Bagi 2 Bagi 3 Ti Ti Shrinkwrap Si 1 to get T i Actual picture FIGURE 5. The Bounded Diameter Lemma and the intersection number argument show that S× i undergoes no compression, andTi actually separates all of ∆i fromE. 5. E ND MANIFOLDS AND END REDUCTIONS In this section, we prove a structure theorem for the topolog y of an end of a 3–manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. A refe rence for basic 3– manifold topology is [He]. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 33 The ﬁrst step is to replace our original manifold with a 1–ended manifold M with the homotopy type of a bouquet of circles and closed orie ntable surfaces. W e then prove Theorem 5.21, the inﬁnite end engulﬁng theorem, which says that given an exiting seqence of homotopically non trivial simple closed curves we can pass to a subsequence Γ and ﬁnd a submanifold W, with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, containing Γ which has the following properties: (1)W can be exhausted by codimension 0 compact submanifolds Wi whose boundaries are 2–incompressible rel Γ∩ Wi. (2)W has a core which lies in W1. This completes the preliminary step in the proof of Theorem 0 .9, as explained at the end of§4. The proof of Theorem 0.9 itself is in §6. In what follows we will assume that all 3-manifolds are orien table and irreducible. Lemma 5.1. IfE is an end of an open Riemannian 3-manifold M ′ with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, thenE is isometric to the end of a 1-ended 3-manifold M whose (possibly empty) boundary is a ﬁnite union of closed orienta ble surfaces. A core of M is obtained by attaching 1-handles to the components of ∂M , unless∂M =∅, in which case a core is a 1-complex and M =M ′. Proof. A thickened Scott coreC [Sc] ofM ′ is a union of 1-handles (possibly empty) attached to a compact 3-manifoldX with incompressible boundary . SplitM ′ along all the boundary components of X and let M be the component which contains E. □ Remark 5.2. M is a submanifold of M ′.M is isometric to a submanifold ˆM of the covering ofM ′ corresponding to the inclusionπ1(M )→ π1(M ′), and the inclusion M→ ˆM is a homotopy equivalence. Deﬁnition 5.3. Call a ﬁnitely generated group a free/surface group if it is a free product of orientable surface groups and a free group. Call a 1-en ded, irreducible, orientable, 3-manifoldM an end–manifold if it has a compact (possibly empty) boundary and a compact core of the form ∂M× I∪ 1-handles if∂M̸=∅ or a handlebody if∂M =∅. Note thatπ1(M ) is a free/surface group for M an end–manifold. Lemma 5.4. If G is a subgroup of a free/surface group, then its π1-rank equals its H1rank, both in Z and Z/ 2Z-coeﬁcients. □ Proof. A ﬁnitely generated subgroup of a free/surface group is a fre e/surface group, and equality holds in that case. An inﬁnitely generat ed subgroup of a free/surface group contains an inﬁnitely generated free su mmand. Consequently , bothπ1 andH1 rank are inﬁnite for such subgroups. □ Lemma 5.5. AnH1-injective subgroupG of a free/surface group K is ﬁnitely generated. Proof. Rankπ1(G) = rank(G/ [G,G ])≤ rank(K/ [K,K ]) = rankπ1(K)<∞ . □ Lemma 5.6. A 1-ended, orientable, irreducible 3-manifold M with compact boundary is an end-manifold if and only if π1(M ) is a free/surface group, H2(M,∂M ) = 0 and∂M isπ1-injective. Every closed embedded π1-injective surface in an end-manifold is boundary parallel . 34 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Proof. LetM be an end-manifold with core C of the form ∂M× I∪ 1-handles or handlebody if ∂M =∅. Since the inclusion C→ M is a homotopy equivalence, ∂M is incompressible and π1(M ) is a free/surface group. If T⊂ M is a compact properly embedded π1-injective surface, then T can be homotoped rel ∂T intoC. The cocores Di of the 1-handles are properly embedded disks whose boundary misses ∂T . Since T is homotopically essential, it follows that each intersect ion T∩ Di is homotopically inessential in T , and therefore T can be homotoped off the cocores of the 1–handles. Once this is done, T can be further homotoped rel. boundary into ∂M , since C deformation retracts to ∂M in the complement of the cocores of the 1–handles. This implies that H2(M,∂M ) = 0 . IfH2(M,∂M ) = 0 andM has incompressible boundary , a connected, closed orientable incompressible surface R must separate off a connected, compact Haken manifoldX with incompressible boundary . Ifπ1(M ) is also a free/surface group, then π1(X) is a closed orientable surface group and using [St] we conclu de that X =N (T ) for some component T of∂M , so R is boundary parallel. Therefore, if ∂M =∅, then any core is a handlebody . If ∂M ̸=∅, then M has a core C which contains∂M [Mc]. If C′ is obtained by maximally compressing C, then each component of∂C ′ is boundary parallel and hence C =∂M× I∪ 1-handles. □ Corollary 5.7. IfW is a 1-ended, π1-injective submanifold of the end-manifold M such thatπ1(W) is ﬁnitely generated and ∂W is a union of components of ∂M , thenW is an end-manifold. Deﬁnition 5.8. Given a connected compact subset J of an open irreducible 3manifoldM , the end reductionWJ of J to M is to ﬁrst approximation the smallest open submanifold of M which can engulf, up to isotopy , any closed surface in M\J which is incompressible in M\J. End reductions were introduced by BrinThickstun [BT1, BT2]. Their basic properties were develope d by Brin-Thickstun [BT1, BT2] and Myers [My]. In particular [BT1] show that WJ can be created via the following procedure. If V1 ⊂ V2 ⊂ ···is an exhaustion of M by compact connected codimension-0 submanifolds such that J ⊂ V1, then one inductively obtains an exhaustion W1 ⊂ W2