7.3. If N is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then each end of N0 is topologically tame. In particular, each end of N is topologically tame. 50 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI Theorem 7.4. IfN = H3/ Γ is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then the limit set LΓ of Γ is either S2 ∞ or has Lebesgue measure zero. IfLΓ =S2 ∞ , then Γ acts ergodically on S2 ∞ . Theorem 7.5 (Classiﬁcation Theorem). IfN is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then N is determined up to isometry by its topological type, its parabolic structure, the conformal boundary ofN0’s geometrically ﬁnite ends and the ending laminations of N0’s geometrically inﬁnite ends. Theorem 7.6 (Density Theorem) . If N = H3/ Γ is a complete ﬁnitely generated 3manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then Γ is the algebraic limit of geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian groups. Theorem 7.7. LetN be a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group and with associated neutered space N0. LetE be an end of N0 with relative compact core C. Let S be a compact surface with the topological type of δEC, the component of the frontier of C which facesE. Let UE denote a parabolic extension of a neighborhood ofE. If there exists a sequence of closed geodesics exiting E, then there exists a sequence{Si} of proper CAT(− 1) surfaces inUP homeomorphic to int (S) which eventually miss every compact set and such that each Si∩ N0 homologically separatesC fromE. Furthermore, ifSi∩ N0 lies to theE side of C, then no accidental parabolic α⊂ Si∩ N0 can be homotoped into a cusp via a homotopy disjoint from C. Remarks 7.8. (1) Theorem 7.7 is the main technical result of this section a nd at the end of this section we will deduce from it Theorems 7.1 a nd 7.3. (2) Theorem 7.3 has been independently proven by Agol [Ag]. (3) Theorem 7.1 implies Theorem 7.2 as follows. A complete hy perbolic 3manifold is geometrically tame if each end of N0 is either geometrically ﬁnite or simply degenerate. By deﬁnition, ends of N0 are either geometrically ﬁnite or geometrically inﬁnite. Using Bonahon’s char acterization of geometrically inﬁnite ends and Theorem 7.1 it follows that g eometrically inﬁnite ends are simply degenerate. (4) Theorem 7.4 immediately follows from Theorem 7.2 by the w ork of Thurston [T] and Canary [Ca]. It also follows from [Ca] that the variou s results of§9 [Ca] hold for N . (5) Theorem 7.3 is the last step needed to prove the monumenta l classiﬁcation theorem, the other parts being established by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky , Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kelineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire– Ohshika, Hossein–Souto and Rees. See [Mi] and [BCM]. (6) The Density Theorem was conjectured by Bers, Sullivan an d Thurston. Theorem 7.3 is one of very many results, many of them recent, n eeded to build a proof. Major contributions were made by Alhfors, Ber s, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky , Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kelineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire– Ohshika, Hossein–Souto, Rees, Bromberg and Brock–Bromber g. (7) The rest of this section is devoted to proving Theorems 7. 7, 7.1 and 7.3. Given the manifold N with neutering N0 and endE ofN0 we explain how to ﬁnd a relative end-manifoldM containingE. Deﬁnition 7.9. If A is a cod-0 submanifold of a manifold with boundary , then the frontierδA ofA is the closure of ∂A− ∂M . If (R,∂R )⊂ (N0,P ) is a mapped SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 51 surface (resp. R is a properly mapped surface in N whose ends exit the cusps), then a P -essential annulus forR is annulus (resp. half open annulus) A with one component mapped to an essential simple curve of R which cannot be homotoped within R into ∂R (resp. an end of R) and another component (resp. the end of A) mapped into P (resp. properly mapped into a cusp). Let C0 be a 3-manifold relative core ofN0. Using [Mc] we can assume thatC0 is of the formH0∪ 1-handles where P0 = C0∩ P = H0∩ P is a core of P consisting of annuli and tori and H0 is a compact 3-manifold with incompressible frontier. Furt hermore δH0 has noP -essential annuli disjoint from int (H0). Deﬁne δEC0 to be the component of δC0 which facesE and δEH0 to be the components of δH0 which faceE. Deﬁne M to be the closure of the component of N0 split along δEH0 which containsE. Deﬁne ∂pM = P∩ M and ∂hM = δEH0. W e call M a relative end-manifold . By construction ∂hM has no P -essential annuli lying in M . By slightly thickening ∂hM and retaining the 1-handles of C0∩ M we obtain a core C of M . If W is a codimension-0 submanifold of M , then∂pW (resp.∂hW ) denotesW∩ ∂pM (resp. W∩ ∂hM ). By passing to the π1(M ) cover ofN we reduce to the case that in :M→ N0 is a homotopy equivalence; furthermore, for each component R of∂hM , the inclusion ofR into the corresponding component of N0\int(M ) is a homotopy equivalence. By passing to a subsequence we can assume that ∆ = {δi} is a collection of geodesics escapingE and is weakly 1000-separating. As in Lemma 5.5 [Ca] we slightly perturb the hyperbolic metric in the 1-neighborhood of ∆ to a metric µ such that for each i,δi isǫ-homotopic to a simple geodesic γi andµ has pinched negative curvature in (− 1. 01,−. 99) and is 1. 01-bilipshitz equivalent to the hyperbolic metric. Let Γ be the resulting collection of simple closed curves. Lemma 7.10. Let M be a relative end-manifold in the complete hyperbolic 3–manifold N . Given a sequence Γ of homotopically essential closed curves we can pass to an in ﬁnite subsequence also called Γ which is the disjoint union γ1∪ γ2∪ γ3∪··· where γ1 has ﬁnitely many components and the other γi’s have one component. If Γi denotes∪ i j=1γj, then there exists a manifoldW open inM , exhausted by a sequence of compact manifolds {Wi} with the following properties, (1)W isπ1 andH1 injective (in Z and Z/ 2Z coeﬁcients) inM and henceN . (2) For all i,∂ hW1 = ∂hWi and is a union of components of ∂hM . At most one component of ∂pW1 can lie in a component of ∂pM . For all i,∂ pWi is a union of essential annuli, each of which contains a component of ∂pW1. The frontier δWi is connected, separates Γi fromE and is 2-incompressible rel Γi. (3) There exists a compact submanifold core F⊂ W1 ofW such that each Γi can be homotoped intoF via a homotopy supported inWi.F is of the form (W1∩∂M )×I with 1-handles attached to the 1-side. Finally |χ (δF )|≤| χ (δC)|. Proof. Except for the last inequality , this lemma is just the relative form of that part of Theorem 5.21 which was used to prove Theorem 0.9. Let J be a connected compact set and V1⊂ V2⊂ V3··· an exhaustion