many Margulis tubes. It follows that they are all con tained in a ﬁxed bounded neighborhoodE ofα orβ , containing Γ. □ T o extract good limits of sequences of minimal surfaces, one generally needs a priori bounds on the area and the total curvature of the limiting sur faces. Here for a surface S, the total curvature ofS is just the integral of the absolute value of the (Gauss) curvature over S. For minimal surfaces of a ﬁxed topological type in a manifold with sectional curvature bounded above, a curvat ure bound follows from an area bound by Gauss–Bonnet. However, our surfaces St are minimal with respect to the gt metrics, which have no uniform upper bound on their sectiona l curvature, so we must work slightly harder to show that the th eSt have uniformly bounded total curvature. More precisely , we show that their restrictions to the complement of any ﬁxed tubular neighborhood Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded total curvature. Lemma 1.22 (Finite total curvature). LetSt be the surfaces constructed in Lemma 1.20. Fix some small, positive ǫ. Then the subsurfaces S′ t :=St∩ M\Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded total curvature. Proof. Having chosenǫ, we choose t large enough so that r(1− t)<ǫ/ 2. Observe ﬁrstly that each St hasgt area less that the gt area of S, and therefore hyperbolic area less that the hyperbolic area of S for sufﬁciently larget. Letτt,s = St∩ ∂N s(Γ) for small s. By the coarea formula (see [Fed],[CM] page 8) we can estimate area(St∩ (Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ)))≥ ∫ ǫ ǫ/ 2 length(τt,s )ds 12 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI If the integral of geodesic curvature along a component σ ofτt,ǫ is large, then the length of the curves obtained by isotoping σ intoSt∩ Nǫ(Γ) grows very rapidly , by the deﬁnition of geodesic curvature. Since there is an a priori bound on the hyperbolic area of St, it follows that there cannot be any long components of τt,s with big integral geodesic curvature. More precisely , consider a long component σ of τt,s . For l∈ [0,ǫ/ 2] the boundary σl of the l-neighborhood of σ in St∩ Nǫ(Γ) is contained in Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ). If the integral of the geodesic curvature along σl were sufﬁciently large for everyl, then the derivative of the length of the σl would be large for every l, and therefore the lengths of the σl would be large for all l∈ [ǫ/ 4,ǫ/ 2]. It follows that the hyperbolic area of the ǫ/ 2 collar neighborhood of σ in St would be very large, contrary to existence of an a priori upper bound on the total hyperbolic area of St. This contradiction implies that for somel, the integral of the geodesic curvature along σl can be bounded from above. T o summarize, for each constant C1 > 0 there is a constant C2 > 0, such that for each component σ ofτt,ǫ which has length ≥ C1 there is a loop σ ′⊂ St∩ (Nǫ(Γ)\Nǫ/ 2(Γ)) isotopic toσ by a short isotopy , satisfying ∫ σ ′ κdl ≤ C2 On the other hand, since St isgt minimal, there is a constant C1 > 0 such that each componentσ ofτt,ǫ which has length≤ C1 bounds a hyperbolic globally least area disk which is contained inM\Nǫ/ 2(Γ). For t sufﬁciently close to 1, such a disk is contained in M\Nr(1− t)(Γ), and therefore must actually be a subdisk of St. By the coarea formula above, we can choose ǫ so that length(τt,s ) is a priori bounded. It follows that if S′′ t is the subsurface of St bounded by the components of τt,s of length > C1 then we have a priori upper bounds on the area of S′′ t , on ∫ ∂S ′′ t κdl , and on −χ (S′′ t ). Moreover, S′′ t is contained in M\Nr(1− t) where the metricgt agrees with the hyperbolic metric, so the curvature K ofS′′ t is bounded above by− 1 pointwise, by Lemma 1.2. By the Gauss–Bonnet formula, this g ives an a priori upper bound on the total curvature of S′′ t , and therefore onS′ t⊂ S′′ t . □ Remark 1.23. A more highbrow proof of Lemma 1.22 follows from Theorem 1 of [S], using the fact that the surfaces S′ t are locally least area for the hyperbolic metric, fort sufﬁciently close to 1 (depending onǫ). Lemma 1.24 (Limit exists) . Let St be the surfaces constructed in Lemma 1.20. Then there is an increasing sequence 0<t 1<t 2<··· such that limi→∞ ti = 1 , and the Sti converge on compact subsets of M\Γ in the C∞ topology to some T ′⊂ M\Γ with closureT inM . Proof. By deﬁnition, the surfaces St havegt area bounded above by the gt area of S. Moreover, since S is disjoint from Γ, for sufﬁciently large t, the gt area of S is equal to the hyperbolic area of S. Since the gt area dominates the hyperbolic area, it follows that the St have hyperbolic area bounded above, and by Lemma 1.22, for any ǫ, the restrictions of St to M\Nǫ(Γ) have uniformly bounded ﬁnite total curvature. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 13 Moreover, by Lemma 1.21, each St is contained in a ﬁxed compact subset of M . By standard compactness theorems (see e.g. [CiSc]) any inﬁ nite sequence Sti contains a subsequence which converges on compact subsets o fE\Γ, away from ﬁnitely many points where some subsurface with nontrivial t opology might collapse. That is, there might be isolated points p such that for any neighborhood U ofp, the intersection of Sti withU contains loops which are essential in Sti for all sufﬁcient largei. But S is 2–incompressible rel. Γ, so in particular it is incompressible in M\Γ, and no such collapse can take place. So after passing to a subs equence, a limit T ′⊂ M\Γ exists (compare [MSY]). Since each St is a globally least area surface inM\Nf (t)(Γ) with respect to the gt metric, it is a locally least area surface with respect to the hyperbolic metric on M\Nr(1− t)(Γ). It follows that T ′ is locally least area in the hyperbolic metric, properly embedded in M\Γ, and we can deﬁne T to be the closure of T ′ inM . □ Lemma 1.25 (Interpolating isotopy). Let{ti} be the sequence as in Lemma 1.24. Then after possibly passing to a subsequence, there is an isotopy F : S× [0, 1)→ M\Γ such that F (S,t i) = Sti and such that for each p∈ S the track of the isotopy F (p, [0, 1)) either converges to some well–deﬁned limit F (p, 1)∈ M\Γ or else it is eventually contained in Nǫ(Γ) for any ǫ> 0. Proof. Fix some smallǫ. Outside Nǫ(Γ), the surfaces Sti converge uniformly in the C∞ topology toT ′. It follows that for any ǫ, and fori sufﬁciently large (depending onǫ), the restrictions ofSti andSti+1 to the complement of Nǫ(Γ) are both sections of the exponentiated unit normal bundle of T ′\Nǫ(Γ), and therefore we can isotope these subsets of Sti toSti+1 along the ﬁbers of the normal bundle. W e wish