Th e seminal result was obtained by Thurston ([T], Theorem 9.2) who proved T heorems 0.3 and 0.4 for certain algebraic limits of quasi Fuchsian groups. B onahon [Bo] established Theorems 0.2 and 0.4 when π1(N ) is freely indecomposible and Canary [Ca] proved that topological tameness implies geometrical tameness. Results in the direction of 0.4 were also obtained by Canary-Minsky [Ca M], Kleineidam– Souto [KS], Evans [Ev], Brock–Bromberg–Evans–Souto [BBES ], Ohshika, Brock– Souto [BS] and Souto [So]. Thurston ﬁrst discovered how to obtain analytic conclusion s from the existence of exiting sequences of CAT (− 1) surfaces. Thurston’s work as generalized by Bonahon [Bo] and Canary [Ca] combined with Theorem 0.2 yield s a positive proof of the Ahlfors’ Measure Conjecture [A2]. Theorem 0.5. If Γ is a ﬁnitely generated Kleinian group, then the limit set LΓ is either S2 ∞ or has Lebesgue measure zero. If LΓ =S2 ∞ , then Γ acts ergodically on S2 ∞ . Theorem 0.5 is one of the many analytical consequences of our main result. Indeed Theorem 0.2 implies that a complete hyperbolic 3-man ifoldN with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group is analytically tame as deﬁned by Canary [Ca]. It follows from Canary that the various results of §9 [Ca] hold for N . Our main result is the last step needed to prove the following monumental result, the other parts being established by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Maskit, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky, Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kleineidam–Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire–Ohshik a, Hossein–Souto and Rees. See [Mi] and [BCM]. Theorem 0.6 (Classiﬁcation Theorem). IfN is a complete hyperbolic 3-manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then N is determined up to isometry by its topological type, the conformal boundary of its geometrically ﬁnit e ends and the ending laminations of its geometrically inﬁnite ends. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 3 The following result was conjectured by Bers, Sullivan and T hurston. Theorem 0.4 is one of many results, many of them recent, needed to buil d a proof. Major contributions were made by Alhfors, Bers, Kra, Marden, Mask it, Mostow , Prasad, Sullivan, Thurston, Minsky , Masur–Minsky , Brock–Canary–Minsky , Ohshika, Kleineidam– Souto, Lecuire, Kim–Lecuire–Ohshika, Hossein–Souto, Rees, Bromberg and Brock– Bromberg. Theorem 0.7 (Density Theorem) . If N = H3/ Γ is a complete ﬁnitely generated 3manifold with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, then Γ is the algebraic limit of geometrically ﬁnite Kleinian groups. The main technical innovation of this paper is a new technique called shrinkwrapping for producing CAT(− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Historically , such surfaces have been immensely important in the study of hyper bolic 3-manifolds, e.g. see [T], [Bo], [Ca] and [CaM]. Given a locally ﬁnite set ∆ of pairwise disjoint simple closed curves in the 3manifoldN , we say that the embedded surface S⊂ N is 2-incompressible rel. ∆ if every compressing disc for S meets ∆ at least twice. Here is a sample theorem. Theorem 0.8 (Existence of shrinkwrapped surface) . LetM be a complete, orientable, parabolic free hyperbolic 3–manifold, and let Γ be a ﬁnite collection of pairwise disjoint simple closed geodesics in M . Further, let S⊂ M\Γ be a closed embedded 2–incompressible surface rel. Γ which is either nonseparating in M or separates some component of Γ from another. ThenS is homotopic to a CAT (− 1) surfaceT via a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M such that (1) F (S× 0) = S (2) F (S× t) = St is an embedding disjoint from Γ for 0≤ t< 1 (3) F (S× 1) = T (4) IfT ′ is any other surface with these properties, then area (T )≤ area(T ′) We say that T is obtained from S by shrinkwrapping rel. Γ, or if Γ is understood, T is obtained fromS by shrinkwrapping. In fact, we prove the stronger result that T is Γ–minimal (to be deﬁned in §1) which implies in particular that it is intrinsically CAT (− 1) Here is the main technical result of this paper. Theorem 0.9. LetE be an end of the complete orientable hyperbolic 3-manifold N with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group. Let C be a 3-dimensional compact core of N ,∂EC the component of ∂C facingE andg = genus(∂EC). If there exists a sequence of closed geodesics exitingE, then there exists a sequence{Si} of CAT(− 1) surfaces of genusg exitingE such that each{Si} is homologically separating inE. That is, each Si homologically separates∂EC fromE. Theorem 0.4 can now be deduced from Theorem 0.9 and Souto [So] ; however, we prove that Theorem 0.9 implies Theorem 0.4 using only 3-ma nifold topology and elementary hyperbolic geometry . The proof of Theorem 0.9 blends elementary aspects of minima l surface theory , hyperbolic geometry , and 3-manifold topology . The method will be demonstrated 4 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI in§4 where we give a proof of Canary’s theorem. The ﬁrst time read er is urged to begin with that section. This paper is organized as follows. In §1 and§2 we establish the shrinkwrapping technique for ﬁnding CAT (− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In §3 we prove the existence of ǫ-separated simple geodesics exiting the end of parabolic free manifolds. In§4 we prove Canary’s theorem. This proof will model the proof of the general case. The general strategy will be outlined at the end of that section. In§5 we develop the topological theory of end reductions in 3-ma nifolds. In§6 we give the proofs of our main results. In §7 we give the necessary embellishments of our methods to state and prove our results in the case of manif olds with parabolic cusps. Notation 0.10. IfX⊂ Y , then N (X) denotes a regular neighborhood of X inY and int(X) denotes the interior of X. If X is a topological space, then|X|denotes the number of components ofX. IfA,B are topological subspaces of a third space, thenA\B denotes the intersection of A with the complement of B. Acknowledgements 0.11. The ﬁrst author is grateful to Nick Makarov for some useful analytic discussions. The second author is grateful to Michael Freedman for many long conversations in Fall 1996 which introduced him to the T ame Ends conjecture. He thanks Francis Bonahon, Y air Minsky and Jeff Bro ck for their interest and helpful comments. Part of this research was carried out w hile he was visiting Nara W omen’s University , the T echnion and the Institute forAdvanced Study . He thanks them for their hospitality . W e thank the referees for their many thoughtful suggestions and comments. 1. S HRINKWRAPPING In this section, we introduce a new technical tool for ﬁnding CAT(− 1) surfaces in hyperbolic 3–manifolds, called shrinkwrapping. Roughly speaking, given a collection of simple closed geodesics Γ in a hyperbolic 3–manifoldM and an embedded surface S⊂ M\Γ, a surface T ⊂ M is obtained from S by shrinkwrappingS rel. Γ if it homotopic to S, can be approximated by an isotopy from S supported inM\Γ, and is least area subject to these constraints. Given mild topological conditions on M, Γ,S (namely 2–incompressibility , to be deﬁned below) the shrinkwrapped surface exists, and is CA T(− 1) with respect to the path