3-cell. Ultimately we will address end r eductions of inﬁnite sequences of exiting curves. Deﬁnition 5.14. IfJ is a ﬁnite union of pairwise disjoint closed curves in an open irreducible 3-manifold M , we say that J is end nonseparable if there is a compact connected submanifoldH such thatJ⊂ int(H) and∂H is incompressible inM\J. Such anH is called a house ofJ. If J is end nonseparable, then deﬁneWJ to be an end-reduction ofH, and callWJ the end reduction of J. Lemma 5.15. The end-reductionWJ of an end nonseparable union J of closed curves is well deﬁned up to isotopy. Proof. Let H and H ′ be two houses for J. W e want to show that if WH is an end reduction of H, then there is an isotopy of H ′ toH ′ 1 ﬁxingJ, so that the end 36 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI reductionWH′ 1 ofH ′ 1 is equal to WH . By the deﬁnition of a house for J, both H and H ′ 1 satisfy the property that they are connected submanifolds o f M whose boundaries are incompressible in M\J. Let{Wi} be a standard exhaustion of WH arising from the exhaustion {Vi} of M . By passing to a subsequence we can assume that H ′∪ H⊂ V2. By considering the passage of V2 to W2, we observe that H ′ can be isotoped to H ′ 1 rel J to lie in int (W2) and that ∂W 2 is incompressible in M\H ′ 1. Thus WH is also an endreduction ofH ′. Since end reductions are unique up to isotopy the result fol lows, and we may unambiguously denoteWH byWJ . □ Lemma 5.16. Let A be a ﬁnite union of pairwise disjoint closed curves in the ope n irreducible 3-manifold M . Then A canonically decomposes into ﬁnitely many maximal pairwise disjoint end nonseparable subsets A1,···,A n. Indeed, if B is a maximal end nonseparable subset of A, thenB =Ai for somei. Proof. Since each element of A is end nonseparable, it sufﬁces to show that if B andC are end nonseparable subsets of A, then either C∪ B is end nonseparable orC∩ B =∅. Let HB andHC be houses for B andC respectively . LetV ⊂ N be a compact submanifold containingHB∪ HC . By considering the passage of V toW by a maximal sequence of compressions, 2-handle additions, and deletions which are taken with respect to B∪ C, one sees that HB (resp. HC ) can be isotoped to lie in W via an isotopy ﬁxing B (resp. C). If B∩ C̸=∅, then W is connected and hence is a house for B∪ C. □ Lemma 5.17. IfA1,···An are the maximal end nonseparable components of a ﬁnite set A of pairwise disjoint closed curves in an open irreducible 3- manifoldM , then they have pairwise disjoint end reductions. In particular they have p airwise disjoint houses. Proof. LetA1,A 2,···,A n be the maximal end nonseparable subsets of A. Let{Vk} be an exhaustion of M withA⊂ V1. Consider a sequence V1 = U1,···,U n = W1 where the passage from one to the next is isotopy , compression, 2-handle addition or deletion, where the compressions or deletions are taken w ith respect to A. By passing to a subsequence of the exhaustion we can assume that W1⊂ V2, and in the above manner pass from V2 toW2. In like manner construct W3,W 4,···. By deleting ﬁnitely many of the ﬁrst Wi’s from the sequence and reindexing, we can assume that all the Wi’s have the same number of components. It sufﬁces to show that if W is a component of Wk, then W contains a unique Ai and that ∂W is incompressible in M\Ai. Indeed, it sufﬁces to prove incompressibility of ∂W in M\(W∩ A), for then W is a house and can only contain oneAi by maximality . If ∂W is compressible in M\(W∩ A) it must compress to the outside via some compressing disc D. Consider a term Vn in the exhausting sequence with Wk∪ D⊂ Vn. By considering the passage of Vn toWn we can rechoose the disc spanning ∂D to obtain a new compressing disc E ⊂ Wn. Since ∂W is incompressible inM\int(Wk), it follows thatE must hit a component of Wk distinct fromW . This imples that Wn contains fewer components than Wk, which is a contradiction. □ Lemma 5.18. IfA1,A 2,···,A n are as in Lemma 5.17, with pairwise disjoint end reductionsWA1,WA2,···,WAn, thenWA1∪W A2∪···∪W An isH1-injective inM , in both Z and Z/ 2Z coefﬁcients. Proof. Repeat the proof of Lemma 5.11. □ SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 37 Corollary 5.19. LetA be a union of ﬁnitely many pairwise disjoint closed curves in the end-manifoldM . If each component of A is homotopically nontrivial, then A breaks up into at most rank (π1(M )) maximal non separable subsets. Proof. IfA partitions into maximal non separable subsets A1,···,A n, then theH1rank ofWAi is non trivial, sinceπ1(WAi ) is a nontrivial subgroup of a free/surface group. Now apply the previous lemma. □ Lemma 5.20. Letγ1,γ 2,··· be a sequence of homotopically nontrivial, pairwise disjoi nt closed curves in the end-manifold M . Then we can group together ﬁnitely many of the curves intoγ1, and pass to a subsequence so that (1) Any ﬁnite subset of{γ1,γ 2,···}which containsγ1 is end nonseparable. (2) Each component ofγ1, and eachγi,i≥ 2 represent the same element ofH1(M, Z/ 2Z). Proof. By passing to a subsequence we can assume that eachγi represents the same element ofH1(M, Z/ 2Z). By Lemma 5.16, if T is a ﬁnite subset of Γ, thenT canonically partitions into ﬁnitely many end nonseparable subse tsS1,···,S n with corresponding pairwise disjoint end reductionsW1,···,Wn. Deﬁne C(T ) = n∑ i=1 rank(H1(Wi, Z/ 2Z)) = rank(H1(∪ n i=1Wi, Z/ 2Z))≤ rank(H1(M, Z/ 2Z)) where the last inequality follows from Lemma 5.18. Deﬁne C(Γ) = max{C(T )|T is a ﬁnite subset of Γ} Now pass to an inﬁnite subset of Γ withC(Γ) minimal. By Lemma 5.18, if T⊂ Γ withC(T ) = C(Γ), then adding a new element to the T does not increase the number of end nonseparable subsets in its canonical partition. SinceC(Γ) is minimal, we can enlarge T by adding ﬁnitely many elements so that the enlarged T , which by abuse of notation we still call T , is end nonseparable. Again by maximality of C(T ), T together with any ﬁnite subset of Γ is still end non separable. Now express Γ as∪γi withγ1 =T . □ Theorem 5.21 (Inﬁnite end engulﬁng theorem) . If γ1,γ 2,··· is a locally ﬁnite sequence of pairwise disjoint, homotopically non trivial, cl osed curves in the end-manifold M , then after passing to a subsequence, allowing γ1 to have multiple components and ﬁxing a base point x∈ γ1, there exist compact submanifolds D⊂ W1⊂ W2⊂··· ofM such that (1) ∂W i∩ ∂M is a union of components of ∂M and∂W i− ∂M is connected. (2) If Γi =∪ i j=1γj, then Γi⊂ Wi, and Γi can be homotoped into D via a homotopy supported inWi. (3) ∂W i is 2-incompressible rel Γi. (4) IfW =∪Wi, thenW isπ1