em 1.2. Outline of the proof of Theorem 1.1. Let P0(S) denote the vertex set of P(S), and let Q : P0(S) → Teich(S) be any map so that Q(P ) ∈ V (P ). Applying work of S. Wolpert and H. Masur there is a uniform constant D > 0 so that the Weil-Petersson diameter of V (P ) satisﬁes diamWP(V (P ))<D for all P ∈ P0(S). A simple argument shows that for any two pants decompositions P1 andP2 diﬀering by an elementary move there is a single Riemann surface X on which all curves in Pi have length less than L. Thus V (P1) ∩ V (P2) is non-empty, and Q is 2D-Lipschitz. Given two pants decompositions P1 and P2 for which V2L(P1) ∩ V2L(P2) ̸= ∅, there is an X ∈ V2L(P1) ∩ V2L(P2): i.e. a single Riemann surface on which each curve in P1 ∪P2 has length at most 2 L. It follows that there is a uniform C so that the total intersection number satisﬁes i(P1,P 2) ≤ C, which in turn provides a uniform bound to the distance dP(P1,P 2) in P(S). THE WEIL-PETERSSON METRIC AND VOLUMES OF CONVEX CORES 5 A compactness argument shows that each X ∈ V (P ) = VL(P ) lies a uniformly deﬁnite distance from ∂V 2L(P ). Thus, a unit-length Weil-Petersson geodesic can always be covered by a uniform number of sub level sets V2L(P ). It follows that any pair of pants decompositions P and P ′ for which V (P ) and V (P ′) contain the endpoints of a unit length Weil-Petersson geodesic, P and P ′ have uniformly bounded distance in P(S), and the theorem follows. Outline of the proof of Theorem 1.2. The proof has two parts. Bounding volume from below: The bound below of core volume in terms of the Weil-Petersson distance begins with an interpolation through the co nvex core ht : Zt → core(Q(X,Y )) of 1-Lipschitz maps of hyperbolic surfaces. It follows that for eac h essential simple closed curve α we have inf t ℓZt (α ) ≥ ℓQ(X,Y )(α ). The path Zt, then, only passes through sets V (P ) for which each element in P has length less than L in Q(X,Y ). Applying recent work of Masur and Minsky, we show if a sequence {P1,...,P n} of pants decompositions is built from N curves and makes bounded jumps, i.e. dP(Pj,P j+1)<k, then its ends satisfy the bound dP(P1,P n) < K0N , where K0 depends only on k and S. The Margulis lemma forces closed geodesics with length less than L inQ(X,Y ) that represent diﬀerent isotopy classes to be uniformly equidistrib uted through the convex core. Since each such representative makes a deﬁnite con tribution to core volume, the lower bound follows. Bounding volume from above. Given pants decompositions PX and PY so that X ∈ V (PX ) and Y ∈ V (PY ), and a geodesic G ⊂ P(S) joining PX to PY , we consider the closed geodesics spin(G) = {α ∗ |α ∈ P for P ∈ G} whereα ∗ denotes the geodesic representative of α inQ(X,Y ). We build a straight triangulation T of all but a uniformly bounded volume portion of core( Q(X,Y )) so that vertices of T lie on α ∗ ∈ spin(G), the so-called spinning geodesics. Our triangulation has the property that all but constant times dP(PX,P Y ) of the tetrahedra in T have at least one edge in a spinning geodesic α ∗ . We then use a spinning trick: by homotoping the vertices around the geodesics in s pin(G) keeping the triangulation straight, all tetrahedra with an edge in any α ∗ can be made to have arbitrarily small volume. Since there is an a priori bound to the volume of a tetrahedron in H3, the remaining tetrahedra have uniformly bounded volume. The theorem then follows from the comparability dWP(X,Y ) ≍ dP(PX,P Y ). Geometrically ﬁnite hyperbolic 3-manifolds. We remark that simple generalizations of these techniques may be employed to obtain estimates f or core volume of hyperbolic 3-manifolds that are not quasi-Fuchsian once the app ropriate version of Weil-Petersson distance is deﬁned. For example, given a hyperbo lic 3-manifold Mψ that ﬁbers over the circle with monodromy ψ , the volume of Mψ is comparable 6 JEFFREY F. BROCK to the Weil-Petersson translation distance of ψ (with constants depending only on the topology of the ﬁber). We take up these generalizations in [Br3 ]. Algebraic and geometric limits. As an application of Theorem 1.2, boundedness of the Weil-Petersson distance dWP(Xk,Y k) for sequences predicts the geometric ﬁniteness of the geometric limit of Q(Xk,Y k). The space QF (S) of all quasi-Fuchsian hyperbolic 3-manifolds lies in the space AH(S) of all complete hyperbolic 3-manifolds M marked by homotopy equivalences (h : S → M ) so that h∗ sends peripheral elements of π1(S) to parabolic elements of π1(M ). The space AH(S) carries the algebraic topology or the compact-open topology on the induced representations h∗ : π1(S) → Isom+(H3) up to conjugacy. In an algebraically convergent sequence {(hk : S → Mk)} inAH(S), normalizing the induced representations ρk = (hk)∗ to converge on generators one may always extract a subsequence so that the groups ρk(π1(S)) = Γk converge in the GromovHausdorﬀ topology on discrete subgroups of Isom +(H3), or geometrically, to a limit ΓG. A central issue in the deformation theory of hyperbolic 3-manifold s is to understand the geometric limit NG = H3/ ΓG. Applying Theorem 1.2, we obtain the following criterion: Theorem 1.4. Let Q(Xk,Y k) → Q∞ be an algebraically convergent sequence in AH(S) with geometric limit NG. Then NG is geometrically ﬁnite if and only if there is a K >0 for which dWP(Xk,Y k)<K for all k. Note that geometric ﬁniteness of NG implies geometric ﬁniteness of Q∞ but not conversely. History and references. The fundamental properties of the Weil-Petersson metric we use are discussed in [Wol1], [Wol3], [Wol4] and [Mas]. The pants graph is the 1-skeleton of the pants complex, introduced in [HT] (see also [HLS]) which is there proven to be connected. The relation of the pants graph to the We il-Petersson metric is similar in spirit to the relative hyperbolicity theorem for Teichm¨ ulle r space of [MM1] where the (related) complex of curves is shown to be quasi-isometric to the electric Teichm¨ uller space, and to be Gromov-hyperbolic (the pants comple x and the Weil-Petersson metric are not in general Gromov-hyperbolic [BF]). For more on quasi-Fuchsian manifolds and their algebraic and geometric limits, s ee [Th1], [Brs1], [Mc2], [Mc1], [Br2], and [Ot]. Plan of the paper. After discussing the fundamental work of S. Wolpert and H. Masur on the Weil-Petersson metric that will serve as our jumping oﬀ point in section 2, we prove the comparability of Weil-Petersson distance an d pants distance (Theorem 1.1) in section 3. We then establish the lower bound on vol( X,Y ) in terms of the distance dP(PX,P Y ) in section 4. Section 5 applies the combinatorics of pants decompositions along a geodesic G ⊂ P(S) joining PX to PY to bound