⊂ ··· ofWJ by compact sets as follows. Transform V1 to W1 through a maximal series of intermediate manifolds U1 =V1,U 2,···,U n =W1 whereUk+1 is obtained fromUk by one of the following 3 operations. (1) Compress along a disc disjoint from J. (2) Attach a 2-handle to Uk which lies inM\int(Uk), and whose attaching core circle is essential in ∂U k. (3) Delete a component of Uk disjoint fromJ. Having constructed Wi, pass to a subsequence of the Vj ’s and reorder so that Wi ⊂ int(Vi+1). Finally pass from Vi+1 to Wi+1 via a maximal sequence of the above operations. Since ∂W i is incompressible inM− J, an essential compression ofUk can be isotoped rel boundary to one missing Wi. Therefore, we will assume such operations miss Wi and hence Wi ⊂ int(Wi+1). Brin and Thickstun [BT1] show thatWJ is up to isotopy independent of all choices. W e say that{Wi} is a standard exhaustion ofWJ ifW1⊂ W2⊂··· andWJ = ∪ iWi, where for eachi,Wi arises fromVi via a sequence of the three end-reduction operations andV1⊂ V2⊂··· is an exhaustion of M by compact submanifolds. SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 35 Remark 5.9. Note that operations (1) and (2) reduce the sum of the ranks of π1 of the boundary components. It follows that the transition fro mVi toWi is obtained by a ﬁnite sequence of operations. Remark 5.10. (Historical Note) Brin and Thickstun [BT1], [BT2] study end reductions to develop a necessary and a sufﬁcient condition, end 1-movability, for taming an end of a 3-manifold. More recently , Myers [My] has promote d the use of end reductions to address both the R3-covering space conjecture and the Marden conjecture. Lemma 5.11. The inclusion iJ :WJ→ N inducesπ1 andH1-injections. The latter in both Z and Z/ 2Z homology. Proof. Theπ1-injectivity was ﬁrst proven in [BT2] and rediscovered in [M y]. Our proof ofH1-injectivity mimics the proof of π1-injectivity in [My]. Suppose C⊂ Wi is a union of oriented simple closed curves bounding the surf aceS⊂ M . Note that by elementary 3–manifold topology , we can assumeS is embedded. By choosing n sufﬁciently large we can assume that Wi∪ S⊂ Vn. If V 1 n is obtained by adding a 2-handle to Vn, thenS⊂ V 1 n . If V 1 n is obtained by compressing V1, via a compression missing J, then by modifying S near the compressing disc we obtain a surface S1 spanningC (orientably , if need be) withS1⊂ V 1 n . If V 1 n is obtained by deleting components of V1 which missC, thenS1 =S∩ V 1 n still spans C. Since Wn is obtained from Vn by a ﬁnite sequence of such operations it follows thatC bounds inWn and hence inWJ . □ H1-injectivity ofWJ inN gives us the following crucial corollary: Corollary 5.12. An end-reduction in an end-manifold has ﬁnitely generated f undamental group. Proof. Combine Lemma 5.11 with Lemma 5.5. □ Deﬁnition 5.13. IfWJ is an end reduction of the codimension-0 submanifold J in N , then we say thatWJ is trivial ifWJ is isotopic to an open regular neighborhood of J or equivalentlyWJ is isotopic to int (J). WJ is eventually trivial if it has an exhaustionW1⊂ W2⊂··· such that∂W i is parallel to ∂W j for alli,j . W e now study end reductions of disconnected spaces J. While the following technology and deﬁnitions can be given for more general obje cts we restrict our attention to a ﬁnite unions of pairwise disjoint closed (pos sibly non simple) curves none of which lie in a 3-cell. Ultimately we will address end r eductions of inﬁnite sequences of exiting curves. Deﬁnition 5.14. IfJ is a ﬁnite union of pairwise disjoint closed curves in an open irreducible 3-manifold M , we say that J is end nonseparable if there is a compact connected submanifoldH such thatJ⊂ int(H) and∂H is incompressible inM\J. Such anH is called a house ofJ. If J is end nonseparable, then deﬁneWJ to be an end-reduction ofH, and callWJ the end reduction of J. Lemma 5.15. The end-reductionWJ of an end nonseparable union J of closed curves is well deﬁned up to isotopy. Proof. Let H and H ′ be two houses for J. W e want to show that if WH is an end reduction of H, then there is an isotopy of H ′ toH ′ 1 ﬁxingJ, so that the end 36 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI reductionWH′ 1 ofH ′ 1 is equal to WH . By the deﬁnition of a house for J, both H and H ′ 1 satisfy the property that they are connected submanifolds o f M whose boundaries are incompressible in M\J. Let{Wi} be a standard exhaustion of WH arising from the exhaustion {Vi} of M . By passing to a subsequence we can assume that H ′∪ H⊂ V2. By considering the passage of V2 to W2, we observe that H ′ can be isotoped to H ′ 1 rel J to lie in int (W2) and that ∂W 2 is incompressible in M\H ′ 1. Thus WH is also an endreduction ofH ′. Since end reductions are unique up to isotopy the result fol lows, and we may unambiguously denoteWH byWJ . □ Lemma 5.16. Let A be a ﬁnite union of pairwise disjoint closed curves in the ope n irreducible 3-manifold M . Then A canonically decomposes into ﬁnitely many maximal pairwise disjoint end nonseparable subsets A1,···,A n. Indeed, if B is a maximal end nonseparable subset of A, thenB =Ai for somei. Proof. Since each element of A is end nonseparable, it sufﬁces to show that if B andC are end nonseparable subsets of A, then either C∪ B is end nonseparable orC∩ B =∅. Let HB andHC be houses for B andC respectively . LetV ⊂ N be a compact submanifold containingHB∪ HC . By considering the passage of V toW by a maximal sequence of compressions, 2-handle additions, and deletions which are taken with respect to B∪ C, one sees that HB (resp. HC ) can be isotoped to lie in W via an isotopy ﬁxing B (resp. C). If B∩ C̸=∅, then W is connected and hence is a house for B∪ C. □ Lemma 5.17. IfA1,···An are the maximal end nonseparable components of a ﬁnite set A of pairwise disjoint closed curves in an open irreducible 3- manifoldM , then they have pairwise disjoint end reductions. In particular they have p airwise disjoint houses. Proof. LetA1,A 2,···,A n be the maximal end nonseparable subsets of A. Let{Vk} be an exhaustion of M withA⊂ V1. Consider a sequence V1 = U1,···,U n = W1 where the passage from one to the next is isotopy , compression, 2-handle addition or deletion, where the compressions or deletions are taken w ith respect to A. By passing to a subsequence of the exhaustion we can assume that W1⊂ V2, and in the above manner pass from V2 toW2. In like manner construct W3,W 4,···. By deleting ﬁnitely many of the ﬁrst Wi’s from the sequence and reindexing, we can assume that all the Wi’s have the same number of components.