S is 2–incompressible, any point x∈ S either lies in M≤ ǫ, or is the center of an embedded m–disk inS, where m = min(ǫ/ 2,δ/ 2) Since S is CAT(− 1), Gauss–Bonnet implies that the area of an embedded m– disk inS has area at least 2π (cosh(m)− 1)>πm 2. This implies that if x∈ S∩ M\M≤ ǫ then area(S∩ Nm(x))≥ πm 2 The proof now follows by a standard covering argument. □ A surfaceS satisfying the conclusion of the Bounded Diameter Lemma is s ometimes said to have diameter bounded by C moduloM≤ ǫ. Remark 1.16. Note that if ǫ is a Margulis constant, then M≤ ǫ consists of Margulis tubes and cusps. Note that the same argument shows that, away from the thin part ofM and anǫ neighborhood of Γ, the diameter of S can be bounded by a constant depending only on χ (S) andǫ. The basic idea in the proof of Theorem 1.10 is to search for a le ast area representative of the isotopy class of the surface S, subject to the constraint that the track of this isotopy does not cross Γ. Unfortunately ,M\Γ is not complete, so the prospects for doing minimal surface theory in this manifold are remote. T o remedy this, we deform the metric on M in a neighborhood of Γ in such a way that SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 9 we can guarantee the existence of a least area surface repres entative with respect to the deformed metric, and then take a limit of such surfaces under a sequence of smaller and smaller such metric deformations. W e describe the deformations of interest below . In fact, for technical reasons which will become apparent in §1.8, the deformations described below are not quite adequate for our purpo ses, and we must consider metrics which are deformed twice — ﬁrstly , a mild deformation which satisﬁes curvature pinching − 1 ≤ K ≤ 0, and which is totally Euclidean in a neighborhood of Γ, and secondly a deformation analogous to the kind described below in Deﬁnition 1.17, which is supported in this totally E uclidean neighborhood. Since the reason for this “double perturbation” will n ot be apparent until §1.8, we postpone discussion of such deformations until that time. Deﬁnition 1.17 (Deforming metrics) . Let δ > 0 be such that Γ is δ–separated. Choose some smallr withr<δ/ 2. Fort∈ [0, 1) we deﬁne a family of Riemannian metricsgt onM in the following manner. The metrics gt agree with the hyperbolic metric away from some ﬁxed tubular neighborhood Nr(Γ). Let h :Nr(1− t)(Γ)→ [0,r (1− t)] be the function whose value at a point p is the hyperbolic distance from p to Γ. W e deﬁne a metric gt on M which agrees with the hyperbolic metric outside Nr(1− t)(Γ), and on Nr(1− t)(Γ) is conformally equivalent to the hyperbolic metric, as follows. Let φ : [0, 1]→ [0, 1] be a C∞ bump function, which is equal to 1 on the interval [1/ 3, 2/ 3], which is equal to 0 on the intervals [0, 1/ 4] and [3/ 4, 1], and which is strictly increasing on [1/ 4, 1/ 3] and strictly decreasing on [2/ 3, 3/ 4]. Then deﬁne the ratio gt length element hyperbolic length element = 1 + 2φ ( h(p) r(1− t) ) W e are really only interested in the behaviour of the metrics gt as t→ 1. As such, the choice of r is irrelevant. However, for convenience, we will ﬁx some smallr throughout the remainder of§1. The deformed metrics gt have the following properties: Lemma 1.18 (Metric properties). Thegt metric satisﬁes the following properties: (1) For each t there is an f (t) satisfyingr(1− t)/ 4<f (t)< 3r(1− t)/ 4 such that the union of tori ∂N f (t)(Γ) are totally geodesic for the gt metric (2) For each component γi and each t, the metric gt restricted to Nr(γi) admits a family of isometries which preserve γi and acts transitively on the unit normal bundle (inM ) toγi (3) The area of a disk cross–section on Nr(1− t) isO((1− t)2). (4) The metric gt dominates the hyperbolic metric on 2–planes. That is, for all 2– vectorsν, thegt area ofν is at least as large as the hyperbolic area of ν Proof. Statement (2) follows from the fact that the deﬁnition of gt has the desired symmetries. Statements (3) and (4) follow from the fact that the ratio of the gt metric to the hyperbolic metric is pinched between 1 and 3. Now , a radially symmetric circle linking Γ of radius s has length 2π cosh(s) in the hyperbolic metric, and therefore has length 2π cosh(s)(1 + 2φ(s/r (1− t))) 10 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI in the gt metric. For sufﬁciently small (but ﬁxed) r, this function of s has a local minimum on the interval [r(1− t)/ 4, 3r(1− t)/ 4]. It follows that the family of radially symmetric tori linking a component of Γ has a local minimum for area in the interval [r(1− t)/ 4, 3r(1− t)/ 4]. By property (2), such a torus must be totally geodesic for the gt metric. □ Notation 1.19. W e denote length of an arcα :I→ M with respect to the gt metric as lengtht(α (I)), and area of a surface ψ :R→ M with respect to the gt metric as areat(ψ (R)). 1.5. Constructing the homotopy . As a ﬁrst approximation, we wish to construct surfaces in M\Γ which are globally least area with respect to the gt metric. There are various tools for constructing least area surfaces in Ri emannian 3-manifolds under various conditions, and subject to various constrain ts. Typically one works in closed 3-manifolds, but if one wants to work in 3-manifolds with boundary , the “correct” boundary condition to impose is mean convexity . A co-oriented surface in a Riemannian 3-manifold is said to be mean convex if the mean curvature vector of the surface always points to the negative side of the su rface, where it does not vanish. T otally geodesic surfaces and other minimal sur faces are examples of mean convex surfaces, with respect to any co-orientation. S uch surfaces act as barriers for minimal surfaces, in the following sense: suppose thatS1 is a mean convex surface, and S2 is a minimal surface. Suppose further that S2 is on the negative side of S1. Then if S2 andS1 are tangent, they are equal. One should stress that this barrier property is local. See [MSY] for a more thorough discussion of barrier surfaces. Lemma 1.20 (Minimal surface exists) . Let M, Γ,S be as in the statement of Theorem 1.10. Let f (t) be as in Lemma 1.18, so that ∂N f (t)(Γ) is totally geodesic with respect to the gt metric. Then for each t, there exists an embedded surface St isotopic in M\Nf (t)(Γ) toS, and which is globally gt–least area among all such surfaces. Proof. Note that with respect to the gt metrics, the surfaces ∂N f (t)(Γ) described in Lemma 1.18 are totally geodesic, and therefore act as barrie r surfaces. W e