geodesic segments in the unit ball in Euc lidean 3-space from SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 17 C⊂ S2 to the origin. For each i, we have an estimate area(cone onCi) = s2 i area(cone onC) +O(s3 i ) For eachi, letT i denote the surface obtained from T∩ Nsi(p) by rescaling metrically by 1/s i. Then T i is a surface with boundary contained in a ball of radius 1 in a space of constant curvature −s2 i . Moreover, it enjoys the same least area properties asT∩ Nsi (p). By the monotonicity property of the ∥Tsi∥ and the coarea formula, we have an inequality lim i→∞ area(T i)≥ area(cone onC) On the other hand, since each T i is least area, we have an estimate 1 2∥Tsi∥ +O(si) = area(cone onTsi) s2 i ≥ area(T i) It follows that the limit of the area of the T i is actually equal to the area of the cone onC. On the other hand, since the φ(Tsi ) converge to C, for sufﬁciently large i we can ﬁnd an immersed annulus Ai inS2 with area≤ κ for any positive κ, which is the track of a homotopy (in S2) from φ(Tsi ) to C. W e let φ − 1(Ai) denote the corresponding annulus in∂N si(p) W e can build a new immersed surface bounded byTsi which is the union of this annulusφ − 1(Ai) with the cone on Ci. This surface can be perturbed an arbitrarily small amount, away from Γ, to an embedded surface F i. After rescaling F i by 1/s i, we get a surface Gi with the same boundary as T i of area equal to area(Gi) = area( cone onC) +κ +O(si) SinceT i is locally least area, it follows that for any κ > 0, for sufﬁciently large i (depending onκ), area(cone onC) + 2κ≥ area(Gi)≥ area(T i)≥ area(cone onC)− κ The surfaceF i contains a subsurface which is the cone on Ci. Since by hypothesis, C is not a geodesic bigon, the cone on C can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to a surface whose area is smaller th an that of the cone onC by some deﬁnite amount ǫ. Similarly , the cone on Ci can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to a surface whose area is smaller than the cone onCi byǫ(si)2 whereǫ is independent of i. After rescaling by 1/s i, It follows that Gi can be perturbed by a compactly supported perturbation to H i with the same boundary asGi andT i, for which area(H i)≤ area(Gi)− ǫ whereǫ is independent ofi. Since κ may be chosen as small as we like, we choose 3κ<ǫ . Then for sufﬁciently large i we get area(H i)< area(T i) which contradicts the least area property of T i. This contradiction shows that C is actually a geodesic bigon, and completes the proof of the cla im. □ 18 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI W e now complete the proof of Lemma 1.27. LetC⊂ S2 be this geodesic bigon. Then inside an ǫ neighborhood of C inS2, we can ﬁnd a pair of curves C± , whereC+ is convex, and C− is convex except for two acute angles on T Γ∩ S2. For each i, letC± i ⊂ ∂N si(p) be the inverse image of C± underφ. The cone on C± i is a pair of barrier surfaces in Ns(p). In particular, once φ(Tsi ) andφ(Tsi+1 ) are both trapped between C+ andC− , the same is true of φ(Ts′) for alls′∈ [si+1,s i]. This is enough to establish the existence of the tangent con e. □ Notice that Lemma 1.27 actually implies that T is a rectiﬁable surface in M , which is a local (topological) embedding. In particular, th is shows that the isotopy F :S× [0, 1)→ M constructed in Lemma 1.25 can be chosen to limit to a homotopy F :S× [0, 1]→ M such thatF (S, 1) = T . 1.7. The thin obstacle problem. From the proof of Lemma 1.27, we see that T exists as a C0 map which by abuse of notation we denote u : T → M . One may immediately improve the regularity ofu. From the construction ofT , it is standard to show that u is actually in the Sobolev space H 1, 2 — that is, the derivative du is deﬁned, and is L2, in the sense of distribution; see [Mor] for a rigorous deﬁni tion of Sobolev spaces, and basic properties. T o see this, observe thatu is a limit of maps F (·,t i) : S→ M which are minimal for the gt metric, and therefore are L2 energy minimizers for the conformal structure onS pulled back by F (·,t i). If the set of conformal structures obtained in this way is precompact, one may extract a limit and therefore boun d theL2 norm ofdu in terms of the L2 norms of the derivatives of any F (·,t i). How can the sequence of conformal structures fail to be precompact? If and only if the conformal structures degenerate by a neck pinch. But the 2–incompressibility of S rel. Γ implies that there is a lower bound on the length of the image of any ess ential curve in S. It follows that the L2 norm of the derivative blows up along such a pinching neck, contrary to the energy minimizing property . So no such degen eration can occur, andu is inH 1, 2 as claimed. This argument is essentially contained in [SY] ( see e.g. Lemma 3.1, page 134), and one may consult this paper for detai ls. W e need to establish further regularity of du along Γ in the following sense. Recall that we are calling L := T∩ Γ the coincidence set. For each local sheet of T , we want u to be C1 along the interior of L from either side, and at a non–interior point ofL, we want u to beC1 on the nose. Now , ifI⊂ L is an interval, then the reﬂection principle (see [Oss]) imp lies that each local sheet T + ofT with∂T + =I can be analytically continued to a minimal surface across I, by taking another copy of T +, rotating it through angle π along the axisI and gluing it to the original T + alongI. It follows that du is real analytic from either side along the interior of L. Note that if the tangent cone at a point p is not literally a tangent plane, then an easy comparison argument implies that p is an interior point of the coincidence set. See [N] page 90 for a fuller discussion. Non–interior points of L are more difﬁcult to deal with, and we actually want to conclude thatdu is continuous at such points. Fortunately , this is a well–known problem in the theory of variational problems, known as the Signorini problem, or the (two dimensional) thin obstacle problem. In the literature, this problem is usually formulated in the following terms: SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 19 Thin Obstacle Problem. Let Ω be a