of M such that ∂hM⊂ ∂V 1 and the ∂pVi are the tori ofM and essential annuli which meet each annular component of ∂pM in exactly one component. Deﬁne the relative end reductionWJ ofJ to be the 52 DANNY CALEGARI AND DA VID GABAI manifold exhausted by submanifolds {Wi} whereVi passes to Wi via the operations of compression, 2-handle addition, deletion and isot opy , where the compressions and 2-handle additions are done only to δVi and its successors. The same arguments as before show that WJ is both π1 andH1-injective and as before we can deﬁne relative notions of end non separable and end-engu lﬁng respectively for ﬁnite and locally ﬁnite inﬁnite collections of homotopy essential pairwise disjoint closed curves. Similarly , since W is a relative end manifold its core can be taken to be of the form stated in 3. The last inequality is the r elative version of inequality (∗) from the proof of Theorem 0.9. □ W e now show that each Wi is an atoroidal Haken manifold with negative Euler characteristic by showing that every embedded torus inc ompressible in Wi is boundary parallel and some component of∂W i is not a 2-sphere. If T is an embedded torus inN , then eitherT cuts off a rank-2 cusp orT is compressible. Therefore, if each component of∂W i is a torus incompressible inN , thenN has ﬁnite volume and Theorem 7.7 holds. The proof of the Claim of §6 shows that no component of ∂W is a torus compressible in N . Therefore, some component of ∂W i has genus ≥ 2. Since tori incompressible in N cut off rank-2 cusps, any nonboundary parallel torus T in Wi must be compressible in N . T o show that T is compressible inWi, it sufﬁces to show that it is compressible in W P i the parabolic extension of Wi inN . Now ∂W P i is a ﬁnite union of properly embedded surfaces in N which are incompressible in N\Γi andN has pinched negative sectional curvature. The proof of the Claim now applies to show that every embedded tor us in W P i which is compressible in N is also compressible in W P i . Lemma 7.11. If (E,∂E )⊂ (N0,P ) is a compact Γ-minimal surface (possibly non embedded), thenE cannot be homotoped rel ∂E intoP . Supposef : R→ N is a properly mapped Γ-minimal surface such that for each ǫ > 0, f − 1(N ǫ 0) is compact andR has noP -essential annuli disjoint from Γ. Iff is transverse to N ǫ 0, then each component of R\int(f − 1(N ǫ 0)) is either a compact disc or a half open annulus. Proof. If such a homotopy exists, then the lift ˜E ofE to H3 has the property that there exists a closed horoball H with∂ ˜E⊂ int(H) andE∩ ∂H̸=∅. This violates the maximum principle. Therefore if σ is a component of f − 1(P ) which bounds a disc D in R, then f (D)∩ N0⊂ P . If σ is essential in R, then σ can be homotoped into an end of R, since there are no P -essential annuli for R disjoint from Γ. Again the maximum principle implies that the entire annular region bounded by σ is mapped into a component ofN\int(N0). □ If W ⊂ N is a codimension 0 submanifold, we say that W has standardly embedded cusps if the restriction of W to each Margulis tube neighborhood of a cusp ofN is either the entire cusp, or is a ﬁnite union of products annu lus× R+ where the product structure is compatible with the product struct ure on the cusp. If N is obtained from a complete hyperbolic manifold by neutering, then this neutering should restrict to a neutering of W . Here is the parabolic version of Lemma 2.3. The reader may wan t to refresh their memory by ﬁrst rereading Lemma 2.3: SHRINKWRAPPING AND THE TAMING OF HYPERBOLIC 3–MANIFOLDS 53 Lemma 7.12 (Parabolic construction lemma) . LetE be an end of the complete open orientable irreducible Riemannian 3–manifold N with metric µ , with ﬁnitely generated fundamental group, and neutering N0 with parabolic locus P . Let W ⊂ N be a submanifold such that ∂W ∩ int(N ) separates W fromE, and whose ends are standardly embedded cusps in the cusps of N . Let ∆1⊂ N0\∂W be a ﬁnite collection of simple closed geodesics with ∆ = W∩ ∆1 a non–empty proper subset of ∆1. Suppose futher that ∂W is 2–incompressible rel. ∆ and has no P –essential annuli disjoint from ∆1. Let the Riemannian metric µ on N agree with a hyperbolic metric outside tubular neighborhoodsNǫ(∆1) and inside tubular neighborhoods Nǫ/ 2(∆1), having ∆1 as core geodesics, and such thatµ is a metric with sectional curvature pinched between− 1. 01 and − 0. 99. LetG be a ﬁnitely generated subgroup of π1(W ), and let X be the covering space of W corresponding to G. Let Σ be the preimage of ∆ inX with ˆ∆⊂ Σ a subset which maps homeomorphically onto ∆ under the covering projection, and let B⊂ ˆ∆ be a nonempty union of geodesics. Suppose there exists a properly embedde d surface S ⊂ X\B of ﬁnite topological type, whose ends are standard cusps in the c usps of X such that S is 2–incompressible rel. B inX and has no P -essential annuli disjoint from B, and which separates every component of B from∂X . Then∂W can be properly homotoped to a ∆1–minimal surface which, by abuse of notation, we call ∂W ′, and the map of S intoN given by the covering projection is properly homotopic to a map whose image T ′ is ∆1–minimal and whose ends exit the cusps of N . Also,∂W ′ (resp.T ′) can be perturbed by an arbitrarily small perturbation to be an embedded (resp. smoothly immersed) surface ∂W t (resp.Tt) boundingWt with the following properties: (1) There exists a proper isotopy from ∂W to ∂W t which never crosses ∆1, and which induces a proper isotopy from W toWt, and a corresponding deformation of pinched negatively curved manifolds X toXt which ﬁxes Σ pointwise. (2) There exists a proper isotopy from S toSt⊂ Xt which never crossesB, such that Tt is the projection of St toN . (3) Each of the limit surfaces F ∈{ ∂W ′,T ′} relatively exits the manifold as its restriction exits the neutered part. That is, if C is a rank 1 cusp foliated by totally geodesic 2 dimensional cuspsC× R perpendicular to the boundary annulus S1× R, then if the intersection ofF with∂C is contained in the regionS1× [t,∞ ), the intersection of F withC is contained in the region C× [t,∞ ), and similarly if the intersection is contained in S1× (−∞ ,t ]. Proof. The essential differences between the statements of Lemma 2.3 and Lemma 7.12 are ﬁrstly that the metric in the parabolic case is pinched, s o that the geodesics can be chosen to be simple; secondly that the surfaces in questio n are all properly embedded, and the isotopies and homotopies are all proper;