in some generality in [14]. The foll owing is Lemma 3.1 of [14]. Lemma 5.5 Let F be a compact orientable surface and let α and β be isotopic simple closed curves on F , intersecting transversely. Then either α and β are disjoint or there is an innermost 2-gon on F bounded by one arc from each of α and β . 31 Proof. The lift of α to the universal cover of F is a family of disjoint lines ˜α , and the lift of β is a similar family ˜β . Assume α and β intersect. Then a lift α 1 of α and a lift β 1 of β also intersect. The curves α 1 and β 1 are isotopic to disjoint lines by a lift of an isotopy making α and β disjoint. The fundamental group of F acts on the universal cover, and α 1 and β 1 have a common cyclic stabilizer. It follows that they intersect inﬁnitely often . An arc of each between adjacent crossing points cuts oﬀ a 2-gon in the universal cov er. A ﬁnite number of arcs of ˜α ∪ ˜β meet this 2-gon. Each such arc is disjoint from either ˜ α or ˜β , so that it cuts oﬀ a smaller 2-gon inside the previous one. We c an pass to an innermost 2-gon whose interior meets no arc of ˜ α ∪ ˜β . This 2-gon is disjoint from any of its translates, and must project 1-1 down to F . □ Lemma 5.6 Let F be an orientable triangulated surface with u triangles, and let α and β be isotopic simple basic curves on F intersecting transversely. Let l be the length of α ∪ β , and let V be the maximal valence of a vertex in F . There is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than l4uV basic moves. Proof. We treat cases. Note that V ≥ 3, l ≥ 4 and u ≥ 4. Case 1: α and β are disjoint. Then α and β bound a subsurface of F homeomorphic to an annulus. We will perform a series of basic moves which isotop the curves t o coincide. The edges of F induces a cellulation of the annulus. The cells are subdisks of triangles, bounded by arcs in α ∪ β . If there is a vertex in this cellulation, we can slide α or β over a vertex by a basic move of type 2. Repeating at most u times, we eliminate all vertices in the annulus. The length o f α ∪ β is increased by at most V − 2 each time we do a basic move, so the ﬁnal curves have total length at most l + u(V − 2) = l + uV − 2u. The annulus between the curves is cut by the edges of F into a collection of cells. Since α and β are disjoint, and each cell boundary contains an edge lying on the 1-skeleton between each edge lying on α ∪ β , all cells are even sided. An Euler characteristic calculation shows that either all cel ls are 4-gons, or there is 32 a 2-gon cell in the annulus, bounded by a basic arc of type 2 and an arc on an edge of the triangulation. If there is a cell which is a 2-gon, we can perform a basic move o f type 3 which slides an arc of α or β across that 2-gon. This decreases the length of α ∪ β by two. After repeating at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2 times, we eliminate all 2-gon cells from the annulus, and arrive at a cellulation in w hich all cells are 4-gons. When all cells are 4-gons, the two boundary componen ts of the annulus are parallel basic curves, each of length at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2. Using at most (l + uV − 2u)/ 2 basic moves of type 1, we can make the two curves coincide. The total number of basic moves required in the three steps ab ove is bounded by u + (l + uV − 2u)/ 2 + (l + uV − 2u)/ 2 = l + uV. Case 2: α and β intersect. Two basic arcs in a triangle with distinct endpoints interse ct at most once, so the total number of intersections of α and β is at most l2/ 4. Lemma 5.5 gives the existence of an innermost disk D1 on the surface, bounded by subarcs α 1 of α and β 1 of β . The 1-skeleton of F induces a cellulation of D1. The cells are bounded by arcs in α 1 ∪ β 1 and arcs in the 1-skeleton of F . If D1 contains a vertex of F , we can isotop α 1 or β 1 over a vertex (possibly a diﬀerent one) by a basic move of type 2, keeping α ∪ β embedded. The number of vertices is bounded above by u, so repeating at most u times, we eliminate all vertices in D1, using at most u basic moves of type 2. The length of α 1 ∪ β 1 is increased by at most V − 2 by each basic move, so α and β are isotoped to curves with total length less than l + u(V − 2) = l + uV − 2u. Since α 1 and β 1 meet at exactly two points in the boundary of D1, there are at most two cells in D1 with an odd number of sides. An Euler characteristic calculation shows that one of three cases occurs: Case 1. All of D1 is contained in a single triangle, or Case 2. There is a 2-gon cell in D1, or Case 3. All cells of D1 are 4-gons, other then two 3-gons containing points 33 of α 1 ∩ β 1. The ﬁrst case is impossible because basic arcs don’t interse ct in more than one point in a single triangle. A 2-gon cell in D1 gives a basic arc of type 2. We can use this to perform a basic move of type 3, which slides a n arc of α 1 or β 1 across a 2-gon. This decreases the length of α 1 ∪ β 1 by two, and thus can be repeated at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2 times. This leaves us in Case 3. We can then isotop β 1 across α 1, using at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2 basic moves of type 1. We have then eliminated the innermost 2-gon D1, reducing the number of intersection points of α and β by two, while using at most l + uV basic moves. The length of α ∪ β is now bounded by the larger value l + uV . If α and β still intersect, we repeat with another innermost disk. Eli minating this disk requires at most ( l + uV ) + uV = l + 2uV basic moves. Repeating at most l2/ 4 times