M in R3 which contains O(n) tetrahedra and has a link L in its 1-skeleton which has a regular projection that gives t he link diagram L. Theorem 8.1 Given a link diagram L of crossing measure n, one can construct a triangulated convex polyhedron P in R3 such that: (i) The triangulation contains at most 840n tetrahedra. (ii) Every vertex in the triangulation is a lattice point (x, y, z) ∈ Z3, with 0 ≤ x ≤ 30n, 0 ≤ y < 30n and − 6 ≤ z ≤ 6. (iii) There is a link L embedded in the 1-skeleton of the triangulation which lies entirely in the interior of P , and whose orthogonal projection on the plane z = 0 is regular and is a link diagram isomorphic to L. Proof. The link diagram L comes with a topological planar embedding which determines the faces. We begin by adding extra vertices to L. To each edge or non-isolated loop we add two new vertices of degree 2, which s plits it into three edges. To each isolated loop we add three new vertices of degr ee 2, making it an isolated triangle. The resulting labeled graph G is still planar, has no loops or multiple edges, and has at most 5 n vertices. (The worst case consists of several disjoint single crossing projections.) Let m denote the number of vertices of G, 41 and call the m − n vertices added special vertices. Note that each vertex of the original graph has associated to it four distinct special ve rtices. Using the topological planar embedding of G, we next add extra edges to triangulate each face of G, obtaining a topologically embedded triangulated planar graph G′. The graph G′ has m vertices and 2 m − 4 bounded triangular faces, and the unbounded face is also a triangle. We next enca se the graph G′ in a triangulated planar graph H′ with m + 3 vertices and 2 m + 2 bounded triangular faces, by framing the outside triangular face wi th a larger triangle and then adding 6 edges to subdivide the resulting concentric re gion into 6 triangles, obtaining G′′. See Figure 14. Figure 14: Triangulating a knot projection. Our next goal is to replace the topological embedding of G′′in the plane with a straight-line embedding. In 1952 Fary showed that straigh t-line embeddings always exist, and a recent result of de Frajsseix, Pach and Po llack [7] states that the vertices can be chosen to lie in a small rectangular grid o f integer lattice points. Their results imply that there exists a planar embed ding of H′ whose vertices V (H′) lie in the plane z = − 1, and are contained in the grid {(x, y, − 1) : 0 ≤ x, y ≤ 10n − 1 ; x, y ∈ Z} , and all edges of the graph H′ are straight line segments. Next we make an identical copy H′′of H′ on the plane z = 1 with H′′= H′ + (0, 0, 2), and vertex set V (H′′) = V (H′) + (0, 0, 2). We now consider the polyhedron P ′ which is the convex hull of V (H′) and V (H′′). It is a triangular 42 prism, because the outside face of H′ is a triangle. We add m1 vertical edges connecting each vertex v ∈ V (H′) to its copy v+(0, 0, 1) ∈ V (H′′). Let E denote these edges, together with all the edges in H′ and H′′. Using these edges, the polyhedron P ′ decomposes into 2 m+ 2 triangular prisms {Qj : 1 ≤ j ≤ 2m− 4}, with the top and bottom faces of each being congruent triangu lar faces of H′ and H′′. We next triangulate P ′ by dissecting each of the 2 m + 2 triangular prisms into 14 tetrahedra, as follows. We subdivide each vertical r ectangular face into four triangles using its diagonals. Then we cone each rectan gular face to the centroid of P ′, and note that the centroid lies in the plane z = 0. We add 4 new vertices to each prism, one on each rectangular face and o ne in the center. The point of this subdivision is that the triangulations of a djacent prisms are compatible. Note also that all new vertices added lie in the l attice 1 3 Z2. Let E ′ denote all the edges in the union of these triangulated prism s. We identify the link diagram G with the graph G embedded in H′. We next observe that there is a polygonal link L embedded in the edge set E ′ whose projection is the link diagram L. We insist that any edge in D that runs to an undercrossing have its vertex which is an undercrossing be in the plane z = − 1, while any edge that runs to an overcrossing have the overcrossing vertex in the plane z = 1. Each such edge goes from one of the n original vertices of L to a special vertex adjacent to that vertex. Edges that do not meet vertices labe led overcrossing or undercrossing are assigned to the z = − 1 plane. The edge corresponding to an edge running from the z = − 1 to the z = 1 plane is contained in one of the diagonals added to a prism. The resulting embedding L in P ′ has a regular orthogonal projection onto the ( x, y)-plane, since no edges are vertical and only transverse double points occur as singularities in the proj ection. Note that no edge of L touches the outer triangle of H′ because all edges project to the graph G′ contained strictly inside H′. This will be important for property (iii). The knot edges lie in the upper and lower boundary of P ′, but do not touch its sides. To have them not touch the boundary we take two addi tional copies of P ′ and glue one to its top, along the plane z = 1, and one to its bottom, along 43 the plane z = − 1. The knot now lies entirely in the interior of the resulting polyhedron P ′′. All the vertices added in this construction lie in 1 3 Z2. The total number of tetrahedra used in triangulating P ′′is 84( m + 1), which is at most 420(n + 1), or at most 840 n for n ≥ 1. Now triple all coordinates ( x, y, z) → (3x, 3y, 3z) to obtain a triangulated polytope P = 3P ′′with integer vertices, with a triangulation that satisﬁes ( i)– (iii). □ Remark. (1). The construction in Theorem 8.1 can be eﬀectively compu ted in time O(n log n) using the Hopcroft-Tarjan planarity algorithms [16] and t he embedding algorithm of de Frajsseix, Pach and Pollack [7, Se ction 4]. (2). One can ask whether a polygonal knot K in R3 that consists of n line segments can be embedded in the 1-skeleton of some triangula ted polyhedron that uses O(n) tetrahedra. We do not know if this can always be