Lie type and the proof of Theorem 1.11. In Section 3 we focus on Lie type groups of bounded dimension and prove Theorem 1.6. In Sectio n 4 we make a closer analysis of groups of the type SL 2(Fp). Combined with a certain three primes theorem this leads to the proofs of Theorem 1.3 and The orem 1.9 in Section 5. Section 6 contains the elementary part of the proo f of Theorem 1.1. In Section 7 we study character values of Sn on permutations with few cycles and squares of conjugacy classes of such permutation s. In this way we obtain a probabilistic proof of Theorem 1.1. Finally, in S ection 8 we formulate results on the intersection of the images of diﬀere nt word maps, and show how to derive them using our methods. The ﬁrst-named author would like to thank Nicholas Katz for s ome useful correspondence. 2. Word values in groups of Lie type In this section, we use algebraic geometry and group-theore tic arguments to give lower bounds on |w(Γ)|for certain groups Γ of Lie type, thus proving Theorem 1.11. Note that the bounds obtained are actually str onger than those we give for alternating groups. Although in the rest of the paper, G denotes a ﬁnite simple group, in this section and §3,G will always denote a simply connected, almost simple algebraic group deﬁned ove r a ﬁnite ﬁeld. To get a ﬁnite simple group Γ, we divide G(Fq) by its center. All simple groups of Lie type arise in this way, excepting the Suzuki and Ree groups. WORD MAPS 7 The Suzuki and Ree groups can also be treated by the methods of this section, but we exclude them to avoid unpleasant technicali ties. Proposition 2.1. Let w be a non-trivial word and G a simply connected almost simple algebraic group over a ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq. Then there is a positive constantc depending only on w and dimG such that |w(G(Fq))|>c |G(Fq)|. This proposition is proved as [L, Prop. 7] in a form that also i ncludes the case of Ree and Suzuki groups. Here we give an alternative pro of that uses standard techniques from algebraic geometry instead of res ults from [LP]. We use the following more or less standard result: Lemma 2.2. Letπ : X → Y denote a dominant morphism between reduced schemes of ﬁnite type over Z. Then there exist constants c1 andc2 such that for every prime p and every point y ∈ Y (Fp), we have |{x ∈ X (Fp) :π (x) = y}| ≤ c1pdimπ − 1x and if π − 1y is non-empty and geometrically irreducible, then |{x ∈ X (Fp) :π (x) = y}| ≥ pdimπ − 1y(1 − c2p− 1/ 2). Proof. By the Lefschetz trace formula, these results are immediate consequences of standard facts about ´ etale cohomology groups: t he boundedness of the compactly supported cohomology groups of the ﬁbers of π , the trace map on the top-dimensional cohomology of (geometrically ir reducible) varieties, and the weight estimates for the eigenvalues of Fro benius on these cohomology groups (see [SGA 4 3, XVIII 2.9] and [De, 3.3.1].) □ We now prove the proposition. Proof. An algebraic group G of this kind is speciﬁed by a connected Dynkin diagram ∆, an automorphism of this diagram (which is determi ned up to inner automorphism by its order g ≤ 3), and a ﬁnite ﬁeld Fq. It suﬃces to prove this proposition for each ﬁxed choice of ∆ and g. First we treat the split case, g = 1. In this case, ∆ determines a simply connected Chevalley scheme G over Spec Z of which G is the Fq-ﬁber, and w determines a morphism of schemes Gd → G which we denote πw. If πw has all ﬁbers of dimension ≤ (d − 1) dimG, then we are done by Lemma 2.2, since |G(Fq)| ≥ c1qdimG and each ﬁber has at most c2q(d− 1) dimG points of G(Fq)d for some positive constants c1 andc2 independent ofq. The diﬃculty is that it might happen, a priori, that most points in G(Fq)d lie in ﬁbers of πw of dimension greater than ( d − 1) dimG. To show that this does not in fact happen for large q we note ﬁrst that πw is dominant; moreover, it is dominant for every ﬁber of Gd over Spec Z [Bo]. Fiber dimension is a constructible function [EGA IV 3, 9.5.5], so the Zariski closure of the set of geometric points s for which dimπ − 1 w (s)> (d − 1) dimG 8 MICHAEL LARSEN AND ANER SHALEV is a proper closed subset of G. Let X denote its inverse image in Gd. By [Bo], X is a proper closed subvariety of Gd for all p which does not contain the generic point of any ﬁber of Gd over Spec Z. By Lemma 2.2, for all q ≫ 0, at least half of the points of G(Fq)d do not lie in X (Fq), and the proposition follows. Finally, we treat the case g ≥ 2. Instead of deﬁning a split group scheme G over Spec Z, we deﬁne a non-split group scheme π : G → S for some higher-dimensional base S such that G splits over a ﬁnite ´ etale Galois cover S ′ over S of degree g. For example, we may take S = Spec Z[1/g ][xg,x −g] ∐ Spec Fg[xg − x] and S ′ = Spec Z[1/g ][x,x − 1] ∐ Spec Fg[x]. The crucial point is that the base is large enough that for eve ry Fq there exists an Fq-valued point s of S whose preimage in S ′ is Fqg , since this guarantees that every G/ Fq with the given Dynkin diagram and diagram automorphism can be obtained as the ﬁber of G for some Fq point of S. □ We can now prove Theorem 1.11. Proof. The case of groups of type E, F, and G and of classical groups of any ﬁxed dimension follows from Proposition 2.1. We need the refore consider only orthogonal groups and symplectic groups. We begi n with the symplectic case. Let V be a 2-dimensional vector space over the ﬁeld Fqr . We endow V with an area form A. We deﬁne a bilinear form on V , regarded as a vector space over Fq, as follows: ⟨v1,v 2⟩ = tr Fqr/ FqA(v1 ∧ v2). This form is obviously antisymmetric and non-degenerate. I t therefore determines an inclusion i : SL 2(Fqr ) → Sp2r(Fq). If x ∈ SL2(Fqr ) has eigenvalues λ ± 1, then i(x) has eigenvalues λ ±qk , k = 0, 1, 2,...,r − 1. As long as these eigenvalues are pairwise distinct, i(x) is a regular semisimple symplectic matrix. This can be achieved by insisting for every proper subﬁeld Fqd, λ belongs neither to F× qd nor to the norm-1 subgroup of Fq2d over Fqd. The subset of SL 2(Fqr ) consisting of elements which violate either condition has cardinality O(q3r/ 2), so by Proposition 2.1, we can ﬁnd at least c1q3r elements of w(SL2(Fqr )) which are regular semisimple in Sp 2r(Fq). If