of a regular simplex. This code is not universally o ptimal, because for the potential functions f (r) = (4 − r)k with 3 ≤ k ≤ 6, arranging two regular pentagons on orthogonal planes yields lower potential energy. For k ≤ 2 their potential energies agree; for k ≥ 7, the (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code is superior to the two pentagons, but we do not know whether it is optimal in these cases. Note th at the kissing conﬁguration of this (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code is a (3 , 6, 1/ 7) code that is not even optimal, let alone universally optimal. The (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code described above is a spherical 2-design in which only two inner products occur between distinct points. It follows th at replacing the bound 2m − 1 with 2 m − 2 in Deﬁnition 1.1 would make Theorem 1.2 false. Probably the (21 , 336, 1/ 5) kissing conﬁguration of the (22 , 891, 1/ 4) code is not universally optimal, but in this case we do not know a better c onﬁguration. We also do not know whether universal optimality holds for the ( 20, 105, 1/ 8) kissing conﬁguration of the (21 , 162, 1/ 7) code or the (21 , 77, 1/ 12) kissing conﬁguration of the (22 , 100, 1/ 11) code. These conﬁgurations are not sharp, so Theorem 1.2 d oes not apply. We do not know whether there exist universally optimal spher ical codes whose universal optimality cannot be proved by our methods. It see ms likely that such codes exist, but we have no candidates to propose. Another important question not addressed by our methods is w hether there are other local minima for potential energy in the cases listed i n Table 1. In certain special cases the existence of other minima is trivial; for e xample, for f (r) = 4 − r, a conﬁguration minimizes potential energy if and only if its centroid is the origin, so there is a positive-dimensional space of global minima (whe n N > 3). In general, that is true for f (r) = (4 − r)k if k is small relative to the number of points in the conﬁguration. (It was proved in [SZ] that spherical k-designs exist on Sn− 1 for all suﬃciently large numbers of points. Spherical k-designs automatically minimize energy for f (r) = (4 − r)k, and because the set of such designs is closed under rotation and taking unions they exist in positive-dimensio nal families once the number of points is large enough.) For suﬃciently large k or for inverse power laws, the set of local minima appears to be ﬁnite, but sometim es there are several. When the number of points is large, there can be vast numbers o f local minima. For example, experiments suggest that for 120 points on S3 under the harmonic power law potential, there are more than ﬁve thousand distin ct local minima, and perhaps far more than that. It is natural to ask whether the requirement of complete mono tonicity could be weakened. For example, regular simplices are optimal for al l decreasing, convex potential functions, although not for all decreasing poten tial functions. That does 108 HENRY COHN AND ABHINA V KUMAR not always hold. Speciﬁcally, the icosahedron is not even a l ocal minimum for the decreasing, convex potential function f (r) = r3 − 48r + 128, but rather a saddle point. One can show using Proposition 4.1 that the glo bal minimum for twelve points in R3 is obtained degenerately by letting them coincide in triple s at the vertices of a tetrahedron. More generally, repeating th e vertices of a regular simplex in Rn is optimal whenever the number of points is a multiple of n + 1. This potential function therefore behaves quite diﬀerently fro m completely monotonic potential functions. The potential function f (r) = r3 − 48r + 128 from the previous paragraph is convex, but r ↦→ f (r2) is not (so the potential energy is not convex as a function of distance, as opposed to distance squared). At the cost of sli ghtly greater complexity one can obtain that stronger property: if f (r) = r7 − 7 ·214 ·√ r + 13 ·214, then r ↦→ f (r2) is decreasing and convex, as is f , but the icosahedron is not a local minimum for potential energy. Although it is not enough to assume that the potential functi on is decreasing and convex, in each case only ﬁnitely many derivative condit ions are needed. For each sharp conﬁguration, our methods produce an explicit bo und K such that optimality holds for a potential function f ∈ CK((0, 4]) whenever ( − 1)kf (k)(r) ≥ 0 for all r ∈ (0, 4] and k ≤ K. We will not discuss this issue further, but it is worth recording the result: for a sharp conﬁguration with m inner products between distinct points, we can take K = 2 m; furthermore, if ( − 1)kf (k)(r) > 0 for all r ∈ (0, 4) and k ≤ 2m, then every conﬁguration of the same size and dimension with this potential energy is sharp (and the same distances o ccur between points in it as in the original conﬁguration). For antipodal conﬁgu rations a more reﬁned construction can be used to reduce both of these bounds by 1, b ut it is implausible that they could be substantially reduced using our methods. We conclude the introduction with one negative result in arb itrary dimensions, namely that there are no universal optima in between the simp lex and cross polytope: Proposition 1.4. If n + 1 < N < 2n, then there is no N -point universally optimal conﬁguration on Sn− 1. Proof. An optimal code of this size has the following structure (see , for example, Theorem 6.2.1 in [B˝ oJr] and the remark following it). There are N − n pairwise orthogonal subspaces of Rn whose span is Rn, each containing d + 1 points of the code if its dimension is d. If the code is universally optimal, then each of these subspaces must contain a regular simplex: because of o rthogonality, distances between points in diﬀerent subspaces are constant, so withi n each subspace we must have a universally optimal code. For the same reason, every u nion of some of the component simplices must be universally optimal as well. Th us, without loss of generality we can assume that N = n + 2. We can also assume that n ≥ 4 because the case of n = 3 and N = 5 was dealt with earlier in this section. Suppose the two regular simplices have i + 1 and n − i + 1 points. For the potential function f (r) = (4 − r)k, the energy of the conﬁguration equals i(i + 1) ( 2 − 2 i ) k + (n − i)(n − i + 1) ( 2 − 2 n − i ) k + (i + 1)(n − i + 1)2k+1. For