the projection plane. Choose an orientation of K. A longitude of a knot K in R3 is characterized by having a linking number with K equal to zero. The linking number is easily calculated from the pro jection. To each crossing of K is associated a sign, and the sum of these signs, called the writhe of the knot, gives the linking number of a curve with K. To ensure that the linking number is zero, we alter the construction of α . Near every overcrossing of K, we add a full twist of α around K. This twist is positive if the sign of the crossing is negative, and vice versa. The result is a knot K2 in R3 that lies on the peripheral torus whose linking number with K is zero. We can construct the associated annulus S in RK with boundary components K and K2 similar to the proof given for Theorem 4.1, and it has O(n2) triangles. In this argument the key step is that the writhe is bounded in terms of the numbe r of crossings of D, which is O(n2), and this gives a bound k = O(n2) in place of (4.14). 5 Isotopies of curves on a surface In this section we examine isotopies between two P L curves α and β on an oriented triangulated surface F , and bound the number of elementary moves 24 needed to move α to β . In the application, the surface will be the peripheral torus ∂R K of a knot K, α will be K1, the boundary of a normal disk, isotopic on ∂R K to β , and β will be a ﬁxed longitudinal curve K2, parallel to K in its regular neighborhood RK. We derive the results of this section for a general surface, since no extra work is needed. Our main result is the following. Theorem 5.1 Let F be a triangulated orientable surface with u triangles, and let α and β be embedded isotopic P L curves on F , each having at most s line segments. Then there is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than 211(s + u2)4u3 elementary moves. Corollary 5.1 Let F be a triangulated orientable surface with at most 210t triangles, and let α and β be embedded isotopic P L curves on F , each having at most 21070209t line segments. Then there is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than 2107t− 1 elementary moves. We will work with specially positioned curves and isotopies , called basic, which we now deﬁne. Let E be a unit edge length equilateral triangle. Let E′ be an equilateral triangle of half the size; see Figure 9. A basic arc in E is one of two types: (a) Type 1. An arc running between the interiors of two distinct edges of E. This type of arc contains three straight line segments. The ﬁrst segment runs from the initial point towards the center of E until it meets E′. The third segment runs from the ﬁnal point of the arc towards the center of E until it meets E′. The middle line segment connects the two in E′. (b) Type 2. An arc with both of its endpoints on the interior of a single ed ge of E. This type of arc contains two straight line segments, each o f which makes an angle of 1 o with the edge. 25 Arcs of type 2 are disjoint from any arcs of type 1 with non-lin king endpoints, since an arc of type one makes an angle larger than 30 0 with an edge of E, and arcs of type 2 are disjoint from the smaller equilateral tria ngle. Now let E′ be any triangle and ﬁx a linear map from E to E′. A basic arc in E′ is deﬁned to be the image of a basic arc in E. Figure 9: Type 1 and type 2 basic arcs. A basic curve in a triangulated surface is a curve which meets each triangl e in a union of basic arcs. Lemma 5.1 Any two basic arcs in a triangle with distinct endpoints whic h lie on the interiors of the edges of E intersect in either zero or one point. Any collection of disjoint embedded curves in a triangle can be i sotoped, without moving their endpoints, to a collection of embedded basic ar cs. Proof. Two basic arcs with distinct endpoints intersect if and only if their endpoints link on the boundary of the triangle. Any family of disjoint embedded arcs in a triangle is isotopic, rel boundary, to any other suc h family. □ Figure 10: Any set of arcs can be isotoped to a set of basic arcs . A basic move of a basic curve in a triangulated surface is deﬁned to be one of the following curve isotopies, each of which produces a ne w basic curve: 26 1 2 3 Figure 11: Basic move of types 1, 2 and 3. (a) Type 1. An isotopy that slides an arc of the curve that crosses an edge along that edge. (b) Type 2. An isotopy that isotops an arc of the curve that crosses an edg e of the triangulation across an adjacent vertex, and then iso tops each of the arcs of intersection with a triangle created or altered in this pr ocess to basic arcs. (c) Type 3. An isotopy that slides an arc of the curve with both endpoints on one edge of a triangle E across the 2-gon it forms with that edge. This results in the joining of two arcs in an adjacent triangle E′. If the two arcs give a closed curve in E′, the closed curve is removed. Otherwise, this new arc is isot oped in E′ to a basic arc. We count the number of elementary moves required by each basi c move. We ﬁrst look in a single triangle. Lemma 5.2 Let α = α 1 ∪ α 2 ∪ ... ∪ α n and β = β 1 ∪ β 2 ∪ ... ∪ β n each be a union of n connected polygonal arcs in a triangle with the endpoints of α i and β i 27 equal, and having a total of a and b edges respectively. Then α can be isotoped to β in the triangle using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves, and 2(a + b) elementary moves in total. Proof. We will count the number of required elementary moves in two c ases. In each case we will isotop both α and β to an intermediate curve γ , which stays close to the boundary of the triangle. To construct γ , we ﬁrst pick θ to be a positive angle which is small enough so that for any vertex v in α ∪ β which lies on an edge of the triangle and any vertex w in α ∪ β which does not lie on that edge, the angle between that edge and the line segment vw is greater than θ . Given an arc α i of α