case, ∆ determines a simply connected Chevalley scheme G over Spec Z of which G is the Fq-ﬁber, and w determines a morphism of schemes Gd → G which we denote πw. If πw has all ﬁbers of dimension ≤ (d − 1) dimG, then we are done by Lemma 2.2, since |G(Fq)| ≥ c1qdimG and each ﬁber has at most c2q(d− 1) dimG points of G(Fq)d for some positive constants c1 andc2 independent ofq. The diﬃculty is that it might happen, a priori, that most points in G(Fq)d lie in ﬁbers of πw of dimension greater than ( d − 1) dimG. To show that this does not in fact happen for large q we note ﬁrst that πw is dominant; moreover, it is dominant for every ﬁber of Gd over Spec Z [Bo]. Fiber dimension is a constructible function [EGA IV 3, 9.5.5], so the Zariski closure of the set of geometric points s for which dimπ − 1 w (s)> (d − 1) dimG 8 MICHAEL LARSEN AND ANER SHALEV is a proper closed subset of G. Let X denote its inverse image in Gd. By [Bo], X is a proper closed subvariety of Gd for all p which does not contain the generic point of any ﬁber of Gd over Spec Z. By Lemma 2.2, for all q ≫ 0, at least half of the points of G(Fq)d do not lie in X (Fq), and the proposition follows. Finally, we treat the case g ≥ 2. Instead of deﬁning a split group scheme G over Spec Z, we deﬁne a non-split group scheme π : G → S for some higher-dimensional base S such that G splits over a ﬁnite ´ etale Galois cover S ′ over S of degree g. For example, we may take S = Spec Z[1/g ][xg,x −g] ∐ Spec Fg[xg − x] and S ′ = Spec Z[1/g ][x,x − 1] ∐ Spec Fg[x]. The crucial point is that the base is large enough that for eve ry Fq there exists an Fq-valued point s of S whose preimage in S ′ is Fqg , since this guarantees that every G/ Fq with the given Dynkin diagram and diagram automorphism can be obtained as the ﬁber of G for some Fq point of S. □ We can now prove Theorem 1.11. Proof. The case of groups of type E, F, and G and of classical groups of any ﬁxed dimension follows from Proposition 2.1. We need the refore consider only orthogonal groups and symplectic groups. We begi n with the symplectic case. Let V be a 2-dimensional vector space over the ﬁeld Fqr . We endow V with an area form A. We deﬁne a bilinear form on V , regarded as a vector space over Fq, as follows: ⟨v1,v 2⟩ = tr Fqr/ FqA(v1 ∧ v2). This form is obviously antisymmetric and non-degenerate. I t therefore determines an inclusion i : SL 2(Fqr ) → Sp2r(Fq). If x ∈ SL2(Fqr ) has eigenvalues λ ± 1, then i(x) has eigenvalues λ ±qk , k = 0, 1, 2,...,r − 1. As long as these eigenvalues are pairwise distinct, i(x) is a regular semisimple symplectic matrix. This can be achieved by insisting for every proper subﬁeld Fqd, λ belongs neither to F× qd nor to the norm-1 subgroup of Fq2d over Fqd. The subset of SL 2(Fqr ) consisting of elements which violate either condition has cardinality O(q3r/ 2), so by Proposition 2.1, we can ﬁnd at least c1q3r elements of w(SL2(Fqr )) which are regular semisimple in Sp 2r(Fq). If semisimple elements a,b ∈ SL2(Fqr ) have eigenvalues α ± 1, β ± 1 respectively, then i(a) and i(b) have the same eigenvalues if and only if α = βqi or α − 1 = βqi for some i ∈ { 0, 1,...,r − 1}. Thus there are at least c2r− 1qr distinct conjugacy classes of regular semisimple elements in WORD MAPS 9 i(w(SL2(Fqr ))) ⊂ w(Sp2r(Fq)). The centralizer of any regular semisimple element i(a) in Sp 2r(Fq) coincides with the image of the centralizer of a in SL2(Fqr ); it is therefore of order qr ± 1. Thus, |i(w(SL2(Fqr )))| ≥ c2r− 1 qr qr + 1 |Sp2r(Fq)|. This proves the theorem for groups of type C. For the cases B and D, we begin by observing that given a vector space V over Fqk and a non-degenerate quadratic form Q0 : V → Fqk deﬁned over Fqk, we can deﬁne a non-degenerate quadratic form on V regarded as an Fq-vector space as follows: Q(v) = tr Fqk/ FqQ0(v). This gives an inclusion Spin(V,Q 0)< Spin(V,Q ). Composing this map with an isomorphism SL 2(Fq2k ) ∼ = Spin− 4 (Fqk ), we obtain an inclusion (2.1) SL 2(Fq2k ) → Spin± 4k(Fq) for some choice of signs. By the classiﬁcation of quadratic f orms over ﬁnite ﬁelds, every spaceW of dimension ≥ 4 with a non-degenerate quadratic form over Fq can be decomposed as W1 ⊥ W2, where W1 is isomorphic to a space V obtained as above and dim W2 ≤ 6. We choose such a decomposition, and let i denote the map SL2(Fq2k ) × Spin(W2) → Spin(W ) obtained by combining (2.1) with the natural map Spin( W1) × Spin(W2) → Spin(W ). Note that i is at most two-to-one since SO( W1) × SO(W2) → SO(W ) is injective. If k ≥ 4, b ∈ Spin(W2) is regular semisimple, and the eigenvalues of a semisimple element a ∈ SL2(Fq2k ) are not contained in a proper subﬁeld of Fq2k , then the image of i(a,b ) in SO(W ) has all eigenvalues distinct and is therefore regular semisimple. By Propositi on 2.1, the number of such pairs ( a,b ) with a ∈ w(SL2(Fq2k )) is at least c3q2kq dim W2 2 =c3q dim W 2 , and the number of semisimple conjugacy classes in w(Spin(W )) determined by such pairs is at least c4r− 1q dim W 2 . For q greater than some constant c5 (independent of k), we can further specify that b ∈ w(Spin(W2)) at the cost of replacing c4 by c6. The centralizer of i(a,b ) in Spin( W ) is a maximal torus of Spin(W ) containing a maximal torus of Spin( W1); it therefore has at most (q2k + 1)(q + 1) dim W2 2 ≤ c7q dim W 2 elements. We conclude that the total number of elements of Sp in(W ) conjugate to elements of i(SL2(Fq2k ) × Spin(W2)) is at least c6 c7 r− 1|Spin(W )|. Finally, we consider the case that q ≤ c5. In this case, we take b = 1, so i(a,b ) is not regular; its centralizer is Spin( W2) times a maximal torus of 10 MICHAEL LARSEN AND ANER SHALEV Spin(W1). The order of the centralizer is therefore less than c(dimW2)2 5 q dim W 2 , and the argument goes through as before. □ 3. W aring’s problem in bounded dimension In this section we focus on simple groups of Lie type G in bounded dimension. Using geometric methods and establishing the irre ducibility of certain ﬁbers (see