arXiv:math/9807012v1  [math.GT]  2 Jul 1998
The number of Reidemeister Moves Needed for
Unknotting
Joel Hass and Jeﬀrey C. Lagarias ∗
November 26, 2024
Abstract
There is a positive constant c1 such that for any diagram D representing the unknot, there is a sequence of at most 2 c1n Reidemeister moves
that will convert it to a trivial knot diagram, where n is the number of
crossings in D. A similar result holds for elementary moves on a polygonal knot K embedded in the 1-skeleton of the interior of a compact,
orientable, triangulated P L 3-manifold M . There is a positive constant
c2 such that for each t ≥ 1, if M consists of t tetrahedra, and K is unknotted, then there is a sequence of at most 2 c2t elementary moves in M
which transforms K to a triangle contained inside one tetrahedron of M .
We obtain explicit values for c1 and c2.
Keywords: knot theory, knot diagram, Reidemeister move, normal surf aces,
computational complexity
∗This paper grew out of work begun while the authors were visit ing the Mathematical
Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley in 1996/7. Researc h at MSRI is supported in part by
NSF grant DMS-9022140. The ﬁrst author is partially support ed by NSF grant DMS-9704286.
1
The Number of Reidemeister Moves
Needed for Unknotting
Joel Hass
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
Jeﬀrey C. Lagarias
AT&T Labs – Research
Florham Park, NJ 07932
(November 26, 2024)
1 Introduction
A knot is an embedding of a circle S1 in a 3-manifold M , usually taken to
be R3 or S3. In the 1920’s Alexander and Briggs [2, §4] and Reidemeister [23]
observed that questions about ambient isotopy of polygonal knots in R3 can
be reduced to combinatorial questions about knot diagrams. These are labeled
planar graphs with overcrossings and undercrossings marke d, representing a
projection of the knot onto a plane. They showed that any ambi ent isotopy
of a polygonal knot can be achieved by a ﬁnite sequence of piec ewise linear
moves which slide the knot across a single triangle, which ar e called elementary
moves (or ∆-moves). They also showed that two knots were ambient is otopic if
and only if their knot diagrams were equivalent under a ﬁnite sequence of local
combinatorial changes, now called Reidemeister moves, see §7.
A triangle in M deﬁnes a trivial knot , and a loop in the plane with no
crossings is said to be a trivial knot diagram . A knot diagram D is unknotted if
it is equivalent to a trivial knot diagram under Reidemeiste r moves.
We measure the complexity of a knot diagram D by using its crossing number, the number of vertices in the planar graph D, see §7. A problem of long
2
standing is to determine an upper bound for the number of Reid emeister moves
needed to transform an unknotted knot diagram D to the trivial knot diagram,
as an explicit function of the crossing number n, see Welsh [30, p. 95]. This
paper obtains such a bound.
Theorem 1.1 There is a positive constant c1, such that for each n ≥ 1, any
unknotted knot diagram D with n crossings can be transformed to the trivial
knot diagram using at most 2c1n Reidemeister moves.
We obtain the explicit value of 10 11 for c1; this value can clearly be improved.
In this paper we have not attempted to get an optimal value for c1, and several
of our estimates are accordingly rather rough.
In 1934 Goeritz [9] showed that there exist diagrams D of the unknot such
that any sequence of Reidemeister moves converting D to the trivial knot must
pass through some intermediate knot diagram D′ that has more crossings than
D.
Figure 1: Goeritz’s unknot.
It is not known how much larger the number of crossings needs t o be for a
general n-crossing knot, but Theorem 1.1 implies the following upper bound.
Corollary 1.1 Any unknotted knot diagram D with n crossings can be transformed by Reidemeister moves to a trivial knot diagram throu gh a sequence of
knot diagrams each of which has at most 2c1n crossings.
This holds because each Reidemeister move creates or destro ys at most two
crossings, and all crossings must be eliminated by the ﬁnal R eidemeister move.
3
It seems possible that for each knot diagram representing th e unknot there
exists some sequence of Reidemeister moves taking it to the t rivial knot diagram
which keeps the crossing number of all intermediate knot dia grams bounded by
a polynomial in n.
In a general triangulated 3-manifold, a trivial knot is a tri angle lying inside
one tetrahedron and an elementary move takes place entirely within a single
tetrahedron of the triangulation. The proof of Theorem 1.1 i s based on a general
result that bounds the number of elementary moves needed to t ransform a closed
polygonal curve K embedded in the 1-skeleton of a triangulated P L 3-manifold
M to a trivial knot.
Theorem 1.2 There is a constant c2 such that for each t ≥ 1, any compact,
orientable, P L 3-manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) triangulated by t tetrahedra
has the following property: If K is an unknot embedded in the 1-skeleton of
interior ( M ), then K can be isotoped to the trivial knot using at most 2c2t
elementary moves.
We obtain the explicit value c2 = 10 7. The hypothesis that K lies in the
interior of M can be weakened to requiring only that K lies in M , as we indicate
in §6.
The methods we use are based on the normal surface theory of Kn eser [20]
and Haken [10]. Haken applied this theory to obtain an algori thm to decide if a
knot is trivial. See [11] for a survey of algorithms to recogn ize unknotting, and
[5] and [4] for possible alternate approaches based on braid s.
The paper is organized as follows. In §2 we deﬁne elementary moves and
outline the proof of Theorem 1.2. In §3, §4 and §5 we bound the number of
elementary moves needed to isotop a curve in three distinct s ettings. First
we consider an isotopy of a curve to a point across a compressi ng disk in a
3-manifold, secondly we consider an isotopy through a solid torus from a core
to a longitude, and ﬁnally we consider an isotopy across a sur face between
two isotopic curves. In §6 we tie these results together to complete the proof
of Theorem 1.2. We then consider the more special case of knot s in R3. In
4
§7 we outline the proof of Theorem 1.1 and begin it by relating e lementary
moves to Reidemeister moves. In §8 we start with a knot diagram and show
how to construct a triangulation of a convex submanifold of R3 containing the
corresponding knot on its 1-skeleton. This allows us to appl y Theorem 1.2. In
§9 we complete the proof of Theorem 1.1.
Note: After completing this paper we learned that S. Galatolo has o btained
results about the case of Reidemeister moves in R3 similar to those stated in
Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.1, and at about the same time. Gal atolo’s constructions are also based on an analysis of normal surfaces. An announcement
of his results will appear in [8].
2 Elementary Moves in a 3-manifold
In this section we deﬁne elementary moves for knots and links . Elementary
moves are well-deﬁned in arbitrary triangulated P L 3-manifolds. In section 7
we will discuss Reidemeister moves, which are associated to knots and links in
R3, and relate these two concepts for manifolds P L-embedded in R3.
A (piecewise linear, unoriented) knot K in a triangulated P L manifold M is
a closed embedded polygonal curve. An (unoriented) link L is a ﬁnite union of
nonintersecting knots in M . Let |L|denote the number of vertices of L.
An elementary move (or ∆- move) on a knot or link consists of one of the
following operations, see Burde and Zieschang [6, p. 4], Mur asugi [21, p. 7].
Each of these operations is required to take place in a single tetrahedron of M .
(1) Split an edge into two edges by adding a new vertex to its in terior.
(1′) [Reverse of (1)] Combine two edges whose union is a line segm ent, erasing
their common vertex.
(2) Given a line segment AB of L that contains a single interior vertex D
and a point C not in L such that the triangle ABC intersects L only in edge
AB, erase edge AB and add two new edges AC and BC and new vertex C.
(2′) [Reverse of (2)] If for two adjacent edges AC and BC of K the triangle
ABC intersects L only in AC and BC then erase AC, BC and vertex C and
5
add the edge AB, with a new interior vertex D.
Figure 2: Two types of elementary moves.
Corresponding to elementary moves of type (2), (2 ′) is the piecewise-linear
operation of linearly pulling the edges of a link across a tri angle ABC . To deﬁne
this operation, an extra vertex D on the segment AB must be speciﬁed; this is
the role of elementary moves (1) and (1 ′).
Two knots K1 and K2 are equivalent if one can be reached from the other by
a ﬁnite sequence of elementary moves. This gives the same equ ivalence classes
as requiring K1 and K2 to be ambient isotopic [25] in M . The unknot is the
class of knots equivalent to a triangle contained in a tetrah edron, and a knot
K is unknotted if it is equivalent to the unknot. Equivalently, an unknot is the
boundary of a P L embedded disk in M [25]. We will work with knots embedded
in the interior of M . This is not a signiﬁcant restriction, since it is possible t o
perturb any knot which meets ∂M into the interior of M after some simplicial
subdivision.
We conclude this section by outlining the proof of Theorem 1. 2. We ﬁrst
construct a compact triangulated P L submanifold MK by removing a solid torus
neighborhood of K. By removing the interior of a solid torus neighborhood RK
of K we construct a new triangulated manifold MK = M − RK. The boundary
of MK consists of the original boundary ∂M plus a 2-torus ∂R K, called the
peripheral torus.
If K is unknotted then MK contains an essential normal disk S. Essential
means that ∂S ⊆ ∂R K is not the boundary of any disk in the torus ∂R K. Drawing on Haken’s normal surface theory, a result of Hass, Lagar ias and Pippenger
[12] implies that S can be chosen to contain at most 2 8t+6 triangles. We present
6
this argument for completeness in §2. Its boundary ∂S is a curve K2. K2 is
isotopic to K within ¯RK. There is a sequence of at most 2 8t+7 elementary moves
which deform K2 to a triangle across triangles in S. This is carried out in §3.
It remains to relate K2 to K by elementary moves.
In §3 we construct a curve K1 isotopic to K in RK which is a longitude, a
curve on the peripheral torus, ∂R K, which bounds an embedded disk in MK
but not inside the peripheral torus. Such curves exist if K is unknotted in M .
In §4 we construct a longitude K2 that lies in the 1-skeleton of the peripheral
2-torus ∂R K, consists of at most O(2c3t) line segments and can be isotoped to K
using at most O(2c3t) elementary moves. In §5 we prove results which are used
to show that there is a sequence of at most O(2c4t) elementary moves which
deform K1 to K2 while remaining entirely in the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K. In §6
we combine these results to complete the proof. All the const ants and bounds
above are explicitly computed.
The proof of Theorem 1.2 in eﬀect deforms the original knot K to a trivial
knot with elementary moves made inside three surfaces: an an nulus is used to
go from K to the longitude K1, a 2-torus is used to go from K1 to the boundary
of a normal disk K2, and a disk is used to go from K2 to the trivial knot.
3 Normal surfaces and elementary moves across
an essential disk
In this section we assume given a compact P L 3-manifold with (possibly
empty) boundary ( M, ∂M ), which is triangulated using t tetrahedra. We will
work with a knot K embedded in the 1-skeleton of Interior( M ). By barycentrically subdividing M twice, we obtain a manifold ( M ′′, ∂M ′′) in which K has a
regular neighborhood RK. The regular neighborhood, obtained by taking the
closed star of K in M ′′, is a solid torus with ∂R K disjoint from ∂M . We let
MK = (M ′′\RK) ∪ ∂R K and note that its boundary ∂M K = ∂M ′′∪ ∂R K. We
call the manifold ( MK, ∂M K) with ∂R K marked a truncated knot complement
7
for K.
A meridian on the peripheral torus ∂R K is an oriented simple closed curve
µ whose homology class [ µ ] in H1(∂R, Z) generates the kernel of the map
j∗ : H1(∂R K, Z)→ H1(RK , Z),
where j : ∂R K֒→RK is the inclusion map. Equivalently, it is a simple closed
curve which bounds a disk in RK but not in ∂R K.
A longitude on the peripheral torus ∂R K is an oriented simple closed curve λ
which intersects a meridian transversely at a single point a nd whose homology
class [ λ ] in H1(∂R, Z) generates the kernel of the map
i∗ : H1(∂R, Z)→ H1(MK, Z),
where i : ∂R K֒→MK is the inclusion map, provided that this kernel is nontrivial. Note that the kernel is always inﬁnite cyclic or tri vial [6].
If the core K of the solid torus RK is unknotted in M , then a longitude
exists, and it bounds a disk in MK. For general K, a longitude does not exist
when K represents an element of inﬁnite order in H1(M, Z). If M ∼
= S3, or more
generally a homology sphere, then a longitude exists for any K. This curve is
sometimes called a preferred longitude.
When a longitude λ of ∂R K exists, its intersection number on ∂R K with a
meridian µ is ± 1, and the homology classes [ µ ] and [ λ ] generate H1(∂R, Z) ∼
=
Z ⊕ Z.
A properly embedded disk in a 3-manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) is a disk
S PL-embedded in M which satisﬁes S ∩ ∂M = ∂S . An essential disk in M is
a properly embedded disk such that ∂S does not bound a disk in ∂M , i.e. the
homotopy class of ∂S in π 1(∂M ) is non-trivial.
Lemma 3.1 Let MK be a triangulated P L 3-manifold which is a truncated knot
complement for K. Then K is unknotted if and only if MK contains an essential
disk S with ∂S a longitude in ∂R K.
8
Proof. If K is unknotted then it bounds a disk which is embedded in M .
This disk can be intersected with MK to give an essential P L disk S in MK.
Conversely if MK contains an essential P L disk S with ∂S ⊆ ∂R K, then the
boundary ∂S of S represents a longitude on ∂R K, which is isotopic to K in RK
[6, p. 29, Thorem 3.1], and therefore is equivalent to K. This disk can be used
to contract ∂S until it becomes a single triangle in MK. The ﬁrst homology
group of a torus, Z ⊕ Z, is canonically isomorphic to its fundamental group,
and the statement about the homology class of [ ∂S ] is a consequence. □
We will use normal surface theory in the form described in Jac o and Rubinstein [18, Section 1]. A normal surface S in a triangulated compact 3-manifold
M is a P L-surface whose intersection with each tetrahedron in M consists of a
disjoint set of elementary disks . These are either triangles and quadrilaterals.
A quadrilateral consists of two triangles glued together al ong an edge lying interior to the tetrahedron. All other edges of each triangle o r quadrilateral are
contained in the 2-skeleton of the tetrahedron, and do not in tersect any vertices.
(See Figure 3).
Figure 3: Elementary disks in a normal surface.
Within each tetrahedron of M there are only 7 kinds of possible triangle or
P L quadrilateral, up to P L-isotopies that map the tetrahedron to itself. These
are labeled by the 7 possible ways of partitioning the vertic es of the tetrahedron
into the two nonempty sets determined by cutting the tetrahe dron along the
triangle or quadrilateral. W. Haken observed that the isoto py-type of a normal
surface is completely determined by the number of pieces of e ach of the 7 kinds
9
that occur in each tetrahedron ∗. This can be described by a nonnegative integer
vector v = v(S) ∈ Z7t, which gives the normal coordinates of S. He also showed
that the set of allowable values v(S) for a normal surface S lie in a certain
homogeneous rational cone CM in R7t which we call the Haken normal cone . If
v = ( v1, v2, . . . , v 7t) ∈ R7t, then Haken’s normal cone is speciﬁed by a set of
linear equations and inequalities of the form
vi ≥ 0 , for 1 ≤ i ≤ 7t , (3.1)
vi1 + vi2 = vi3 + vi4 (up to 6 t equations) . (3.2)
The second set of equations expresses matching conditions which say that the
number of edges on a common triangular face of two adjacent te trahedra coming
from regions in each of the tetrahedra must match. For each tr iangular face
there are three types of edges (speciﬁed by a pair of edges on t he triangle),
which yields 3 matching conditions per face. Triangular fac es in the boundary
∂M give no matching equations. The cone CM is rational because all equations
3.1, 3.2 have integer coeﬃcients. We let
CM (Z) = CM ∩ Z7t , (3.3)
which is the set of integral vectors in the Haken normal cone CM . Haken deﬁned
a fundamental surface to be a normal surface S such that
v(S) ̸= v1 + v2 , with v1, v2 ∈ C M (Z)\{0} .
Such a vector v(S) is called an element of the minimal Hilbert basis H(CM )
of CM , using the terminology of integer programming, see Schrijv er [27, Theorem 16.4].
Theorem 3.1 (Haken) If a triangulated, irreducible, orientable, compa ct 3manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) contains an essential disk whose boundary
is in a component ∂R of ∂M , then it contains such an essential disk S with
boundary in ∂R which is a fundamental normal surface.
∗Haken’s [10] treatment of normal surfaces was based on a form ulation using cells. W e
follow an alternate development based on tetrahedra, as in J aco and Rubinstein [18, Section 1]
and Jaco and Tollefson [19]
10
Proof. See Jaco-Rubinstein [18, Theorem 2.3] for a treatment of the existence
of an essential normal disk in M with boundary on ∂R . For a fundamental disk,
we refer to Jaco and Tollefson [19, Corollary 6.4], which est ablishes the stronger
result that there exists such a disk that is a fundamental sur face and is also a
vertex surface, which means that v(S) lies on an extreme ray of Haken’s normal
cone CM . □
Remark. This result applies in arbitrary 3-manifolds. The proof in [ 19] assumes compactness and irreducibility of M , but these hypotheses can be removed. A classical theorem of Alexander implies that knot co mplements in the
3-sphere are always irreducible.
Hass, Lagarias and Pippenger [12] give a simple bound for the complexity
of any fundamental surface, whose proof we include for compl eteness.
Lemma 3.2 Let M be a triangulated compact 3-manifold, possibly with boundary, that contains t tetrahedra.
(1) Any vertex minimal solution v ∈ Z7t of the Haken normal cone C M in
R7t has
max
1≤ i≤ 7t
(vi) ≤ 27t− 1 . (3.4)
(2) Any minimal Hilbert basis element v ∈ Z7t of the Haken fundamental cone
CM has
max
1≤ i≤ 7t
(vi) < t ·27t+2 . (3.5)
Proof. (1) Choose a maximal linearly independent subset of matchin g condition equations 3.2. There will be 7 t − d of them, where d = dim R( C M ). Any
vertex ray is determined by adjoining to these equations d − 1 other binding
inequality constraints
{vik = 0; 1 ≤ k ≤ d − 1} ,
with the proviso that the resulting system have rank 7 t − 1. These conditions
yield a (7 t− 1)× 7t integer matrix M of rank 7 t− 1, and the vertex ray elements
11
z = (z1, . . . , z 7t) satisfy
M z = 0 .
In order to get a feasible vertex ray in C M all nonzero coordinates zi must have
the same sign.
At least one of the unit coordinate vectors e1, e2, . . . e7t must be linearly
independent of the row space of M. Adjoin it as a ﬁrst row to M an d we
obtain a full rank 7 t × 7t integer matrix
˜M =
[ ek
M
]
, det( ˜M) ̸= 0 .
Consider the adjoint matrix ad j( ˜M) = det( ˜M) ˜M
− 1
, which has integer entries
wij = ad j( ˜M)ij = (− 1)i+j det ˜M[j|i] , (3.6)
in which ˜M[j|i] is the minor obtained by crossing out the jth row and ith column
of ˜M. Let
w = [w11, w21, . . . , w 7t, 1]t
be the ﬁrst column of ad j( ˜M). Since ˜Mad j( ˜M) = det( ˜M) I this yields
Mw = 0 ,
and w ̸= 0 because ⟨ek, w⟩ = det( ˜M) ̸= 0. We bound the entries of w using
Hadamard’s inequality, which states for an m × m real matrix N that
det( N) 2 ≤
m∏
i=1
∥ni∥2 , (3.7)
in which ∥ni∥2 is the Euclidean length of the ith row ni of N. We apply this to
equation 3.6, and observe that each row of the (7 t − 1) × (7t − 1) matrix ˜M[j|i]
has squared Euclidean length at most 4, because this is true f or all row vectors
in the system of equations 3.2 and for ek. Applied to equation 3.6 this gives
|wij|2 ≤ 47t− 1 .
However equation 3.6 shows that w ∈ Z7t, and a vertex minimal solution v in
the extreme ray is obtained by dividing w by the greatest common divisor of
12
its elements, hence
max
1≤ i≤ 7t
|vi| ≤ max
1≤ i≤ 7t
|wi1| ≤ 27t− 1 .
(2) A simplicial cone C in R7t is a d-dimensional pointed cone which has
exactly d extreme rays. Let v(1), . . . , v(d) ∈ Z7t be the vertex minimal solutions
for the extreme rays. Each point in C can be expressed as a nonn egative linear
combination of the v(j), as
v =
d∑
j=1
cjv(j), each cj ≥ 0 .
If v is in the minimal Hilbert basis H( C) of the cone C, then 0 ≤ cj ≤ 1, for
otherwise one has
v = (v − v(j)) + v(j) ,
and both v− v(j) and v(j) are nonzero integer vectors in C, which is a contradiction. Thus, any minimal Hilbert basis element v = ( v1, . . . , v 7t) of a simplicial
cone satisﬁes
|vi| ≤
d∑
j=1
|v(j)| for 1 ≤ i ≤ 7t . (3.8)
The cone C M may not be simplicial, but we can partition it into a set of
simplicial cones { C(k)
m } each of whose extreme rays are extreme rays of C M
itself. We have
H( C M ) ⊆
⋃
k
H( C (k)
M ) .
Thus all Hilbert basis elements of H( C M ) satisfy the bound 3.8 for Hilbert
basis elements of H( C (k)
M ). Using equation 3.4 to bound |v(j)|we obtain
|vi| ≤ d27t− 1 < 7t27t− 1 < t27t+2 ,
as claimed. □
A P L-embedded normal disk S can be used as a template to transform its
boundary ∂S to a single triangle by a sequence of elementary moves, in suc h a
way that all intermediate curves lie on the surface S.
13
Lemma 3.3 Let M be a piecewise-linear triangulated compact 3-manifold wit h
boundary, and let S be a normal disk in M that consists of w triangles. Then
∂S can be isotoped to a triangle by a sequence of at most 2w elementary moves
on M , each of which takes place in a triangle or edge contained wit hin S.
Proof. We will construct a sequence of w simple closed curves
∂S = C0, C1, C2, . . . , C w− 1 = ∂T
where T is a triangle in S, and such that for 0 ≤ i ≤ w − 1:
(i) Ci+1 is obtained from Ci by at most two elementary moves; either a move
of type 2 ′ across a single triangle in S followed by a move of type 1 ′ which
removes the extra vertex created by the ﬁrst move, or a move of type 1
followed by a move of type 2 across a single triangle in S.
(ii) There is a triangulated disk Si contained in S which consists of w − i
triangles, such that Ci = ∂S i.
The construction proceeds by eliminating triangles in S one at a time by a
sequence of steps, each consisting of two elementary moves, in such a way as to
preserve the property that each Sj is a topological disk. We proceed by induction
on j, with the base case j = 0 holding by hypothesis. For the induction step,
we note that the only way that removing from Sj a triangle that contains at
least one edge of ∂S j can yield a surface Sj+1 that is not a topological disk is
by producing a vertex v that is a cut-point, i.e. v is visited twice in the curve
∂S j+1. In that case v is a vertex of ∂S j, which implies that the triangle that is
removed must have exactly one edge on ∂S j, and the pair of elementary moves
pulls this edge across to the two edges of this triangle that a re adjacent to v.
We therefore proceed by ﬁrst checking if Sj has any triangle having two edges
on ∂S j. If so, we remove this triangle to obtain Sj+1. If this cannot be done,
then Sj must contain an interior vertex, because a triangulated pol ygon that
has no interior vertices and contains more than one triangle contains at least 2
triangles having two edges on the boundary. In this case ther e exists a triangle
14
having one edge on the boundary which also has an interior ver tex, and we can
pull across this triangle to obtain Sj+1. This completes the induction step. □
Putting all these results together yields:
Lemma 3.4 Let MK be a triangulated P L 3-manifold consisting of t tetrahedra
which is a truncated knot complement for K. If K is unknotted, then there is
an essential normal disk S in MK that contains at most 28t+6 triangles, and S
has a polygonal boundary K1 = ∂S which lies on the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K
and consists of at most 28t+7 line segments. The boundary K1 of S can be
transformed to a single triangle by at most 28t+7 elementary moves, with all
intermediate curves being the boundary of some triangulate d subdisk of S.
Proof. By Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 3.1 there exists an essential normal
disk which is a fundamental surface for MK. The bound of Lemma 3.2 implies
that this surface contains at most 7 t2 ·27t+2 < t 2 ·27t+5 < 28t+5 triangles
and quadrilaterals. Since each quadrilateral consists of t wo triangles in the
triangulation, we obtain the upper bound 2 8t+6 for the total number of triangles.
The boundary ∂S contains at most two edges of each triangle, for a total of at
most 2 8t+7 edges. Lemma 3.3 gives the stated bound on elementary moves. □
Remark. We could improve the above estimate by using a vertex minimal
solution which is a disk.
4 Longitudes and cores of solid tori
In this section we bound the number of elementary moves neede d to isotop a
knot K in the 1-skeleton of a triangulated compact 3-manifold ( M, ∂M ) across
an annulus to a curve K2 which is a longitude on the peripheral torus ∂R K of
K. The main result of this section is the following:
Theorem 4.1 Let (M, ∂M ) be a triangulated compact P L 3-manifold with t
tetrahedra, let K be an unknotted curve embedded in Interior (M ), and let ∂R K
be the peripheral torus of K in the second barycentric subdivision of M . Then
15
there exists a P L closed curve K2 in ∂R K which is a longitude for ∂R K in MK
such that:
(i). There is an embedded P L annulus S in the solid torus RK whose two
boundary components are K2 and K, and which consists of at most 21858t
triangles.
(ii). There is an isotopy from K2 to K across S that consists of at most
21858t+1 elementary moves.
Remarks. The closed curve K2 is embedded in ∂R K but generally does not
lie in its 1-skeleton. In the special case that ( M, ∂M ) is P L-homeomorphic to
a triangulated convex polyhedron in R3, as occurs with a standard knot, the
exponential bounds in (i), (ii) can be improved to bounds pol ynomial in t, as
we indicate after the proof.
The proof of Theorem 4.1 proceeds in three steps. We ﬁrst cons truct a closed
curve α embedded in the 1-skeleton of RK which is parallel to the core K, i.e. its
homology class [ α ] in H1(∂R K, Z) has intersection number ± 1 with a meridian
[µ ]. We next observe that the homology class in H1(∂R K, Z) of a longitude K2
is necessarily
[K2] = ± ([α ] + k[µ ]) (4.9)
for some integer k. The second step is to bound |k|by an exponential function
of t. The third step is to obtain K2 from α by adding k twists to α near a ﬁxed
meridian µ . Given K2, we construct a triangulated annular surface S embedded
in RK which lies in the 2-skeleton of RK except in a “collar” of one meridian
disk, into which the k twists are inserted. All vertices of the triangulated annul us
S lie on its boundary ∂S = K2 ∪ K. Finally we obtain an isotopy giving the
elementary move bound by pulling K across the triangles in S to K2.
We begin with some preliminary lemmas involving P L topology, which pin
down some of the combinatorial structure of the regular neig hborhood of K.
Background for P L topology can be found in [17] or [26].
16
Let v0, . . . , v r be the vertices of the knot K in M . Since RK lies in the
second barycentric subdivision of M , each edge [ vi, vi+1] of K is subdivided
into four edges by the addition of three new vertices . We will continue to
denote the subdivided curve by K. Denote the original vertices vi by w4i and
let w4i+1, w4i+2, w4i+3, 0 ≤ i ≤ r denote the new vertices added in the two
barycentric subdivisions. We also use the convention that ws = w0, where
s = 4 r + 4 is the total number of vertices, so that the vertices wi of K are
cyclically ordered.
We will break up the solid torus RK into a union of what we call wheels
and wedges. For each edge [ wi− 1, wi] let the wheel around that edge be the
closed star St([wi− 1, wi], RK) of the edge [ wi− 1, wi] in the solid torus RK. This
is the union of all the tetrahedra in RK having [ wi− 1, wi] as an edge, and is
homeomorphic to a closed ball. For each vertex wi on K let the wedge around
wi be the union of all the tetrahedra in RK meeting K only at the point wi.
Let
µ i = lk([wi− 1, wi], RK) , 1 ≤ k ≤ s , (4.10)
be the link of the edge [ wi− 1, wi] in the solid torus RK.
/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr
/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr
yyyyy
yyyyy
/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr
/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr
/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr/BnZr
yyyyy
yyyyy
yyyyy
/BnZr/BnZr
/BnZr/BnZr
/BnZr/BnZr
yy
yy
yy
w0
w1 w3 w4
w2
w5 w6
µ1 =µ2 µ3 =µ4 µ5 =µ6
wheel wedge
Figure 4: A 2-dimensional section of RK.
Lemma 4.1 (1) Each µ i lies in ∂R K and is a meridian.
(2) µ i and µ j coincide if i is odd and j = i + i or if i is even and j = i − 1.
Otherwise µ i and µ j are disjoint.
(3) An edge on ∂R K either lies on some µ i or else lies on a unique triangle in
RK whose opposite vertex w lies on K.
17
Proof. (1) The closed star St([wi− 1, wi], RK) is supported on the set of
tetrahedra in RK having [ wi− 1, wi] as an edge. Each such tetrahedron has one
edge which is disjoint from [ wi− 1, wi], and the link µ i is the union of these
edges. The surface Di which is obtained by coning µ i to the vertex wi forms a
topological disk in RK whose boundary is µ i, and which intersect K transversely
in a single point. Thus µ i is a meridian; see Figure 5.
(2) This follows since RK is a barycentric subdivision. The vertices wi
with i odd were added during the second barycentric subdivision. P rior to the
second subdivision, these vertices lay along interior poin ts of edges of K. The
two meridians associated to the edges [ wi− 1, wi] and [ wi, wi+1] coincide; see
Figure 4 for a cross sectional sketch of RK. For i even, the distance between
wi− 1 and wi+1 in link(wi) is at least four, since the link has been barycentrically
subdivided. If µ i ∩ µ i+1 ̸= ∅ then this distance equals two.
(3) Each edge in ∂R K is an edge of a triangle with a vertex wi on K, since
RK is obtained by taking the closed star of K in M ′′. If the edge is in a meridian
µ i, then it lies in triangles with vertices at both wi− 1 and wi or wi and wi+1.
If it doesn’t lie on a meridian then it is contained in the wedg e around wi. Any
triangle containing the edge and a point w′ on K cannot cross the two wheels
meeting wi, and the point w′ must coincide with w. □
wk
D k
wk+2
Dk+2
wk+1
µk = µk+1 µk+2 = µk+3
K
Figure 5: Adjacent meridians. The index k is odd.
Lemma 4.2 There exists an embedded closed curve α in the 1-skeleton of ∂R K
which is parallel to K in RK. There is an annulus S0 embedded in the 2-skeleton
of the solid torus RK whose boundary components are α and K, and all vertices
18
of S0 lie in its boundary α ∪ K.
Proof. We construct α as the union of a sequence of arcs. For each odd
i, 1 ≤ i ≤ s, we pick a path α i in the 1-skeleton of ∂R K that connects a vertex
xi of µ i = µ i+1 to a vertex xi+1 on µ i+2 = µ i+3, does not cross µ i− 1, and is
shortest among all such paths. (We don’t allow α i to cross µ i− 1 to prevent it
from running between the curves in the wrong direction.) We s et xs = x0 as
before. Note that α i is embedded and that it meets the collection of meridians
only at its endpoints, since otherwise it can be shortened.
We then add for each odd i a connecting path β i on µ i from the endpoint
xi− 1 of α i− 2 to the initial point xi of α i, and we set
α = β 1α 1β 3α 3β 5 . . . β s− 1α s− 1 . (4.11)
The path α is a closed curve, and is embedded in ∂R K.
We construct the surface S0 as follows. Each path β i, 1 ≤ i ≤ s, i odd,
lies on a meridian µ i = µ i+1 which is the boundary of a meridian disk Di+1
centered at the vertex wi+1 on K, and we cone β i to wi+1 along Di+1, obtaining
a subdisk of Di+1. For each edge α i that lies on the boundary of the wedge
around the vertex wi+1, there is a unique triangle containing that edge and
wi+1. For ﬁxed i, the union of these triangles forms a disk in RK meeting K at
the point wi+1, and ∂R K along β i ∪ α i, and whose boundary consists of β i ∪ α i
together with two interior edges of RK, one running from the initial point xi− 1
of β i to wi+1 and one running from the endpoint xi+1 of α i to wi+1 .
Finally for each meridian µ i with i odd, there is a pair of triangles
[wi− 1, wi, xi− 1]
and
[wi, wi+1, xi− 1],
whose union is a disk contained in the two wheels around [ wi− 1, wi] and [wi, wi+1],
and connecting the free edge running from the endpoint xi− 1 of α i− 2 to wi− 1
to the free edge running from the initial point (also xi− 1) of β i to wi+1. The
19
union of all these disks forms an annulus which is embedded in the 2-skeleton
of RK, whose boundary components are α and K, and all vertices of which lie
in α ∪ K. See Figure 6. □
w0 w1 w3 w4w2 w5 w6
x1 x3
x5
x2 x4
α1 α3 β5β3β1
x0
Figure 6: The annulus S0.
Proof of Theorem 4.1. We wish to convert the closed curve α given in
Lemma 4.2 to a longitude K2 by adding “twists”. The homology class [ K2] of
a longitude K2 satisﬁes
[K2] = ± ([α ] + k[µ ])
where µ is a ﬁxed meridian. According to Lemma 4.1 we may choose µ to be
µ 1 taken with a ﬁxed orientation.
The number k represents the number of “twists” that we must insert in α
to convert it to the knot K2. We proceed to bound k in terms of the number of
tetrahedra t in the original manifold M . We may assume k ̸= 0 for otherwise
we are done. The value of k is uniquely determined by the requirement that
the homology class [ α ] + k[µ ] vanish in H1(MK, Z). (Here we use the fact that
[µ ] is nonvanishing in H1(MK, Z).) This is equivalent to the curve α + kµ
being a boundary in the cycle group. The manifold MK contains at most 576 t
tetrahedra, since it is contained in the second barycentric subdivision, hence
the number e of edges in MK is at most 3456 t. The group of boundaries in the
P L chain complex of MK is generated by the paths around all 2-simplices in
MK, and the number f of these is at most 2304 t. We choose ﬁxed orientations
for the edges and faces, and we can then describe a basis of gen erators for the
group of boundaries using an e × f matrix M = [ M ab] with entries
Mab =
{ ± 1 if a is an edge in the oriented 2-simplex b ,
0 otherwise .
20
in which each column of M has exactly three nonzero entries. L et cα be the
e × 1-vector describing α as an oriented cycle in MK, and cµ be the e × 1 vector
describing µ as an oriented cycle in MK. All entries in cα and cµ are 0,1 or − 1.
The condition for cα + kcµ to be a boundary is that the linear system
Mx = cα + kcµ (4.12)
have a solution in integer unknowns x = ( x1, . . . , x f )T . The hypotheses imply
that this linear system is solvable over Z for a unique value of k. By taking a
generating set of boundary faces, we have that M is of full col umn rank. The
meridian class cµ is not in the column space of M since otherwise µ would
bound a surface in MK and the unknotted curve K would represent an element
of inﬁnite order in H1(M, Z). It follows that there is at most one real value of
k for which the system (4.12) is solvable, for if there were two then cµ would
be in the column space of M. Thus cµ is linearly independent of the column
space of M and the linear system
[ M , cµ ]
[ x
− k
]
= cα ,
has full column rank. Choosing a suitable f +1 rows of [ M cµ ] yields an invertible
matrix ˜M and
[ x
− k ] = ˜M
− 1
˜cα ,
in which ˜cα is the subset of cα determined by the same f + 1 rows. By Cramer’s
rule we have
− k = 1
det( ˜M)
f +1∑
i=1
˜M[i, f + 1](˜cα )i ,
where ˜M[i, f + 1] denotes a minor of ˜M on the last column. Since |(˜cα )i| ≤ 1
we have
|k| ≤
f +1∑
i=1
|˜M[i, f + 1]|. (4.13)
We bound the terms in this expression using Hadamard’s deter minant bound
(3.7). Each column of ˜M has at most three nonzero entries, each equal to ± 1,
except the last column, which does not appear in the f × f minor ˜M[i, f + 1].
21
This yields the bound
|˜M[i, f + 1]|2 ≤ 3f , 1 ≤ i ≤ f + 1 ,
which with (4.13) yields
|k| ≤ (f + 1)3
f
2 ≤ (2304t + 1)31152t . (4.14)
We now describe how the “twists” are added to α and the surface S0 of
Lemma 4.2. to yield an annulus S with boundary a longitude. The disk D2
cuts the core K at the point w2 and stretches to the boundary. We add the
twists to S0 by modifying it inside the wedge around w2. Let A denote the
surface consisting of the set of closed triangles in the wedg e around w2 which
intersect the meridian µ 2 and which lie in ∂R K. Then A is an annulus, and
we suppose it contains ℓ triangles. The ﬁrst edge e of α 1 has one endpoint on
µ 1 = µ 2 and the other endpoint disjoint from µ 2 and on the other boundary
component of A.
We replace the edge [ x1, v] of α with a path α ′ of kℓ edges which form a
spiral going k times around A, starting at x1 and ending at v; see Figure 8. To
convert the surface S0 of Lemma 4.2 to the desired surface S, we ﬁrst subdivide
the interval [ x1, v] into kℓ segments by adding vertices y1, y2, . . . , y kℓ − 1. We
remove the triangle [ x1, v, w2] from S0 and add kℓ new triangles, obtained by
coning the edges of α ′ to w2. This construction produces the surface S, which
is also an annulus and which also has its vertices either on K or ∂R K.
It is now straightforward to complete the proof. To prove (i) we observe that
the number of triangles in S is at most the number of triangles in RK, which is
at most 2304 t, plus the number kℓ of extra triangles added in the “twisting” step
in constructing S from S0. The trivial bound for ℓ is the number of triangles in
M ′′which is at most 2304 t. Combining this with (4.14) yields at most
2304t + kℓ ≤ 2304t + (2304t + 1)31152t(2304t) ≤ t2 ·31152t+20 < 21858t
triangles in S.
22
x1
vµ1 =µ2
µ3 =µ4
∂S0
∂RK
w2
Figure 7: S0.
µ1 =µ2
µ3 =µ4∂S
∂RK
x1
v
w2
Figure 8: Adding twists replaces S0 by S.
23
To prove (ii) we pull the curve K across S to K2 one triangle at a time.
Using the fact that all vertices of S are in the boundary ∂S , a suitable legal
order of triangles to pull across is easily found. Counting t wo elementary moves
per triangle, this yields at most 2 1858t+1 elementary moves in total. □
Remark. In the special case that the manifold M is embedded in R3, as when
we start with a standard knot complement, we can improve the b ounds (i), (ii)
of Theorem 4.1 to be polynomial in n. We sketch the idea. The knot K has at
most 2304 t edges in M . Using the embedding of the manifold M in R3 we can
ﬁnd a regular projection of the knot to a knot diagram D, and this has O(n2)crossings, as we show in Lemma 7.1 of §7. We can specify a curve α in the
1-skeleton of ∂R K which is parallel to the core K whose projection runs just to
the right of K in the projection plane. Choose an orientation of K. A longitude
of a knot K in R3 is characterized by having a linking number with K equal
to zero. The linking number is easily calculated from the pro jection. To each
crossing of K is associated a sign, and the sum of these signs, called the writhe
of the knot, gives the linking number of a curve with K. To ensure that the
linking number is zero, we alter the construction of α . Near every overcrossing
of K, we add a full twist of α around K. This twist is positive if the sign of the
crossing is negative, and vice versa. The result is a knot K2 in R3 that lies on
the peripheral torus whose linking number with K is zero. We can construct
the associated annulus S in RK with boundary components K and K2 similar
to the proof given for Theorem 4.1, and it has O(n2) triangles. In this argument
the key step is that the writhe is bounded in terms of the numbe r of crossings
of D, which is O(n2), and this gives a bound k = O(n2) in place of (4.14).
5 Isotopies of curves on a surface
In this section we examine isotopies between two P L curves α and β on an
oriented triangulated surface F , and bound the number of elementary moves
24
needed to move α to β . In the application, the surface will be the peripheral
torus ∂R K of a knot K, α will be K1, the boundary of a normal disk, isotopic
on ∂R K to β , and β will be a ﬁxed longitudinal curve K2, parallel to K in its
regular neighborhood RK. We derive the results of this section for a general
surface, since no extra work is needed.
Our main result is the following.
Theorem 5.1 Let F be a triangulated orientable surface with u triangles, and
let α and β be embedded isotopic P L curves on F , each having at most s line
segments. Then there is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than 211(s +
u2)4u3 elementary moves.
Corollary 5.1 Let F be a triangulated orientable surface with at most 210t
triangles, and let α and β be embedded isotopic P L curves on F , each having at
most 21070209t line segments. Then there is an isotopy carrying β to α via no
more than 2107t− 1 elementary moves.
We will work with specially positioned curves and isotopies , called basic, which
we now deﬁne. Let E be a unit edge length equilateral triangle. Let E′ be an
equilateral triangle of half the size; see Figure 9. A basic arc in E is one of two
types:
(a) Type 1. An arc running between the interiors of two distinct edges of
E. This type of arc contains three straight line segments. The ﬁrst segment
runs from the initial point towards the center of E until it meets E′. The third
segment runs from the ﬁnal point of the arc towards the center of E until it
meets E′. The middle line segment connects the two in E′.
(b) Type 2. An arc with both of its endpoints on the interior of a single ed ge
of E. This type of arc contains two straight line segments, each o f which makes
an angle of 1 o with the edge.
25
Arcs of type 2 are disjoint from any arcs of type 1 with non-lin king endpoints,
since an arc of type one makes an angle larger than 30 0 with an edge of E, and
arcs of type 2 are disjoint from the smaller equilateral tria ngle.
Now let E′ be any triangle and ﬁx a linear map from E to E′. A basic arc
in E′ is deﬁned to be the image of a basic arc in E.
Figure 9: Type 1 and type 2 basic arcs.
A basic curve in a triangulated surface is a curve which meets each triangl e
in a union of basic arcs.
Lemma 5.1 Any two basic arcs in a triangle with distinct endpoints whic h lie
on the interiors of the edges of E intersect in either zero or one point. Any
collection of disjoint embedded curves in a triangle can be i sotoped, without
moving their endpoints, to a collection of embedded basic ar cs.
Proof. Two basic arcs with distinct endpoints intersect if and only if their
endpoints link on the boundary of the triangle. Any family of disjoint embedded
arcs in a triangle is isotopic, rel boundary, to any other suc h family. □
Figure 10: Any set of arcs can be isotoped to a set of basic arcs .
A basic move of a basic curve in a triangulated surface is deﬁned to be one
of the following curve isotopies, each of which produces a ne w basic curve:
26
1
2
3
Figure 11: Basic move of types 1, 2 and 3.
(a) Type 1. An isotopy that slides an arc of the curve that crosses an edge
along that edge.
(b) Type 2. An isotopy that isotops an arc of the curve that crosses an edg e
of the triangulation across an adjacent vertex, and then iso tops each of the arcs
of intersection with a triangle created or altered in this pr ocess to basic arcs.
(c) Type 3. An isotopy that slides an arc of the curve with both endpoints on
one edge of a triangle E across the 2-gon it forms with that edge. This results
in the joining of two arcs in an adjacent triangle E′. If the two arcs give a closed
curve in E′, the closed curve is removed. Otherwise, this new arc is isot oped in
E′ to a basic arc.
We count the number of elementary moves required by each basi c move. We
ﬁrst look in a single triangle.
Lemma 5.2 Let α = α 1 ∪ α 2 ∪ ... ∪ α n and β = β 1 ∪ β 2 ∪ ... ∪ β n each be a
union of n connected polygonal arcs in a triangle with the endpoints of α i and β i
27
equal, and having a total of a and b edges respectively. Then α can be isotoped
to β in the triangle using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves, and 2(a + b)
elementary moves in total.
Proof. We will count the number of required elementary moves in two c ases.
In each case we will isotop both α and β to an intermediate curve γ , which stays
close to the boundary of the triangle. To construct γ , we ﬁrst pick θ to be a
positive angle which is small enough so that for any vertex v in α ∪ β which lies
on an edge of the triangle and any vertex w in α ∪ β which does not lie on that
edge, the angle between that edge and the line segment vw is greater than θ .
Given an arc α i of α , we construct an arc γ i with the same endpoints,
but with interior disjoint from α and containing just two segments. If α i runs
between distinct edges of the triangle then it cuts oﬀ a subdi sk containing a
single vertex of the triangle. Construct γ i to consist of two segments, each
of which makes an angle of θ with the edges going towards that vertex. By
deﬁnition of θ , γ i will be disjoint from the interiors of α i and β i. If α i has both
endpoints on a single edge of the triangle, then it cuts oﬀ a su bdisk containing
no vertices and a segment of one edge. Construct γ i to consist of two segments
contained in this disk, each of which makes an angle of θ with its edge. Again,
γ i will be disjoint from the interiors of α i and β i.
(1) α and β are connected.
If α does not meet both sides of β , then the region between them can be
triangulated with a + b − 2 triangles, which can be used to isotop α to β
using a + b − 2 type 2 elementary moves. If they intersect, then applying
the previous argument shows that each can be isotoped to the d isjoint
curve γ by using a and b type 2 elementary moves respectively. It follows
that we can always isotop α to β using at most a + b type 2 elementary
moves, and 2( a + b) elementary moves of all types.
(2) α and β are not connected.
28
We will construct an isotopy from α to β which keeps the curves embedded
at each stage. Let ai be the number of segments of α i, so that ∑n
i=1 ai = a.
Each arc α i of α cuts oﬀ a disk meeting exactly one vertex of the triangle
in which it lies, if it runs between distinct edges of the tria ngle, or no
vertices if it runs from an edge back to that edge. An arc of α is said
to be outermost if it cuts oﬀ a disk which contains no other arcs of α .
Let α i be outermost. Then γ i is disjoint from all the other arcs in α ∪ β
and meets α i ∪ β i only in their endpoints. The number of segments of γ i
is two, and γ = ⋃γ i is embedded. We can isotop the outermost arc α i
of α to the arc γ i with the same endpoints without ever introducing any
new intersections in α , since the other arcs in α lie on the other side of
α i from γ i. This isotopy requires at most ai type 2 elementary moves,
as in the previous case. We then repeat for an outermost arc α j among
the collection of arcs of α − {α i}. This isotopy takes place between α j
and γ j, and in particular never meets γ i. Repeating for all arcs in α , we
can isotope the entire collection α to γ using at most ∑n
i=1 ai = a type 2
elementary moves. Similarly, we can isotop β to γ using at most b type
2 elementary moves. It follows that we can isotop α to β using at most
a + b type 2 elementary moves.
The total number of elementary moves required in these isoto pies is at most
twice the number of type 2 elementary moves.
□
Deﬁne the length of a P L curve transverse to the 1-skeleton of a triangulated
surface to be the number of edges of the 1-skeleton that it cro sses, counted with
multiplicity.
Lemma 5.3 A basic move in a surface with a triangulation of valence at mo st
V can be realized by at most 28 elementary moves for a type 1 basi c move,
6V + 24 elementary moves for a type 2 basic move, and 22 elementary mo ves
for a type 3 basic move. In all cases 17V elementary moves suﬃce.
29
Proof. We count the number of elementary moves required for each typ e of
basic move.
Lemma 5.2 implies that a type 1 basic move requires at most 14 e lementary
moves in each of the two triangles meeting the edge along whic h the curve is
isotoped.
The type 2 basic move can be done in the following sequence of s teps.
(1) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the arc in a neighborhoo d of an edge
to pass through the adjacent vertex.
(2) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the curve to run along ed ges in a
neighborhood of the adjacent vertex.
(3) V − 2 type 2 elementary moves slide the arc over a neighborhood of the
vertex in each adjacent triangle.
(4) At most 7 type 2 elementary moves slide the arc to basic cur ves in each
of the original two triangles, by Lemma 5.2.
(5) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the arc to basic curves i n each of the
V − 2 triangles where new intersections were introduced.
Summing, this basic move requires less than 3 V + 12 type 2 elementary moves,
and 6 V + 24 in total.
The type three basic move requires
(1) One type 2 elementary move to slide the arc to coincide wit h a subarc of
its adjacent edge.
(2) At most 10 type 2 elementary moves slide the resulting arc to a basic
curve with the same endpoints in the adjacent triangle, by an application
of Lemma 5.2. This sums to at most 11 elementary moves of type 2 and
22 elementary moves of all types.
Since V ≥ 3, in all cases 17 V elementary moves suﬃce. □
If two basic curves are isotopic using only basic moves of typ e 1, we say that
they are parallel basic curves.
30
Figure 12: Elementary moves for a type 2 basic move.
Lemma 5.4 Let α and β be two parallel basic curves with total length ℓ. Then
α can be isotoped to coincide with β by ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1. Similarly, α
can be isotoped across β by ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1.
Proof. Each of α and β has length ℓ/ 2 and they intersect each triangle of
the surface in pairs of parallel basic arcs. Using ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1,
we can either move the intersections of α along each edge to coincide with the
intersection of β with that edge, or move the intersections past to the other si de
of β . □
Let α and β be intersecting simple closed curves in general position on a
surface F . A 2-gon is a subdisk of F whose boundary consists of one subarc of
each of α and β . A 2-gon is innermost if no arc of α or β meets its interior. In
some cases, it can be shown that curves with excess intersect ion create innermost
2-gons. This is analyzed in some generality in [14]. The foll owing is Lemma 3.1
of [14].
Lemma 5.5 Let F be a compact orientable surface and let α and β be isotopic
simple closed curves on F , intersecting transversely. Then either α and β are
disjoint or there is an innermost 2-gon on F bounded by one arc from each of
α and β .
31
Proof. The lift of α to the universal cover of F is a family of disjoint lines
˜α , and the lift of β is a similar family ˜β . Assume α and β intersect. Then a lift
α 1 of α and a lift β 1 of β also intersect. The curves α 1 and β 1 are isotopic to
disjoint lines by a lift of an isotopy making α and β disjoint. The fundamental
group of F acts on the universal cover, and α 1 and β 1 have a common cyclic
stabilizer. It follows that they intersect inﬁnitely often . An arc of each between
adjacent crossing points cuts oﬀ a 2-gon in the universal cov er. A ﬁnite number
of arcs of ˜α ∪ ˜β meet this 2-gon. Each such arc is disjoint from either ˜ α or ˜β ,
so that it cuts oﬀ a smaller 2-gon inside the previous one. We c an pass to an
innermost 2-gon whose interior meets no arc of ˜ α ∪ ˜β . This 2-gon is disjoint
from any of its translates, and must project 1-1 down to F . □
Lemma 5.6 Let F be an orientable triangulated surface with u triangles, and
let α and β be isotopic simple basic curves on F intersecting transversely. Let l
be the length of α ∪ β , and let V be the maximal valence of a vertex in F . There
is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than l4uV basic moves.
Proof. We treat cases. Note that V ≥ 3, l ≥ 4 and u ≥ 4.
Case 1: α and β are disjoint.
Then α and β bound a subsurface of F homeomorphic to an annulus. We
will perform a series of basic moves which isotop the curves t o coincide.
The edges of F induces a cellulation of the annulus. The cells are subdisks
of triangles, bounded by arcs in α ∪ β . If there is a vertex in this cellulation, we
can slide α or β over a vertex by a basic move of type 2. Repeating at most u
times, we eliminate all vertices in the annulus. The length o f α ∪ β is increased
by at most V − 2 each time we do a basic move, so the ﬁnal curves have total
length at most l + u(V − 2) = l + uV − 2u.
The annulus between the curves is cut by the edges of F into a collection of
cells. Since α and β are disjoint, and each cell boundary contains an edge lying
on the 1-skeleton between each edge lying on α ∪ β , all cells are even sided. An
Euler characteristic calculation shows that either all cel ls are 4-gons, or there is
32
a 2-gon cell in the annulus, bounded by a basic arc of type 2 and an arc on an
edge of the triangulation.
If there is a cell which is a 2-gon, we can perform a basic move o f type 3
which slides an arc of α or β across that 2-gon. This decreases the length of
α ∪ β by two. After repeating at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2 times, we eliminate all
2-gon cells from the annulus, and arrive at a cellulation in w hich all cells are
4-gons. When all cells are 4-gons, the two boundary componen ts of the annulus
are parallel basic curves, each of length at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2. Using at most
(l + uV − 2u)/ 2 basic moves of type 1, we can make the two curves coincide.
The total number of basic moves required in the three steps ab ove is bounded
by
u + (l + uV − 2u)/ 2 + (l + uV − 2u)/ 2 = l + uV.
Case 2: α and β intersect.
Two basic arcs in a triangle with distinct endpoints interse ct at most once,
so the total number of intersections of α and β is at most l2/ 4. Lemma 5.5
gives the existence of an innermost disk D1 on the surface, bounded by subarcs
α 1 of α and β 1 of β . The 1-skeleton of F induces a cellulation of D1. The cells
are bounded by arcs in α 1 ∪ β 1 and arcs in the 1-skeleton of F . If D1 contains
a vertex of F , we can isotop α 1 or β 1 over a vertex (possibly a diﬀerent one)
by a basic move of type 2, keeping α ∪ β embedded. The number of vertices is
bounded above by u, so repeating at most u times, we eliminate all vertices in
D1, using at most u basic moves of type 2. The length of α 1 ∪ β 1 is increased
by at most V − 2 by each basic move, so α and β are isotoped to curves with
total length less than l + u(V − 2) = l + uV − 2u.
Since α 1 and β 1 meet at exactly two points in the boundary of D1, there are
at most two cells in D1 with an odd number of sides. An Euler characteristic
calculation shows that one of three cases occurs:
Case 1. All of D1 is contained in a single triangle, or
Case 2. There is a 2-gon cell in D1, or
Case 3. All cells of D1 are 4-gons, other then two 3-gons containing points
33
of α 1 ∩ β 1.
The ﬁrst case is impossible because basic arcs don’t interse ct in more than
one point in a single triangle. A 2-gon cell in D1 gives a basic arc of type 2.
We can use this to perform a basic move of type 3, which slides a n arc of α 1 or
β 1 across a 2-gon. This decreases the length of α 1 ∪ β 1 by two, and thus can
be repeated at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2 times. This leaves us in Case 3. We can
then isotop β 1 across α 1, using at most ( l + uV − 2u)/ 2 basic moves of type
1. We have then eliminated the innermost 2-gon D1, reducing the number of
intersection points of α and β by two, while using at most l + uV basic moves.
The length of α ∪ β is now bounded by the larger value l + uV . If α and
β still intersect, we repeat with another innermost disk. Eli minating this disk
requires at most ( l + uV ) + uV = l + 2uV basic moves. Repeating at most l2/ 4
times we eliminate all intersections and arrive at disjoint curves. Summing the
resulting series, which has at most l2/ 4 terms, gives a bound of
l + uV + (l + 2uV ) . . . + (l + (l2/ 4)uV ) ≤ l3/ 4 + l2
4 ( l2
4 − 1)uV / 2 ≤ l3/ 4 +l4uV / 32
basic moves. With the curves now disjoint, and having length less than l+ l2
4 uV ,
case 1 isotops them to coincide using at most l + l2
4 uV + uV basic moves. The
total number of basic moves used is less than
l3/ 4 + l4uV / 32 + l + l2
4 uV + uV.
Since l ≥ 4 and u ≥ 4,
l4uV ≥ l4uV / 32+2l3uV ≥ l4uV / 32+l3/ 4+4l2uV ≥ l4uV / 32+l3/ 4+l+l2uV / 4+uV
so the sum is less than l4uV as claimed. □
Lemma 5.7 Let F be an orientable triangulated surface with u triangles, and
let α and β be isotopic basic curves on F in general position. Let l be the total
length of α ∪ β . Then there is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than
17l4u3 elementary moves.
34
Proof. The required number of basic moves is at most l4uV , and each basic
move requires at most 17 V elementary moves, so the total number of elementary
moves required is less than 17 l4uV 2. We know V ≤ u so that 17 l4u3 gives a
bound on the number of elementary moves. □
We now give the proof of the main result of this section.
Proof of Theorem 5.1: We begin by isotoping α to a basic curve. First we
perturb α to miss the zero-skeleton of the triangulation. There are at most u
vertices, and each has at most V edges coming into it, where V is the maximal
valence of the triangulation of the surface. We can perturb α near any vertex
which it passes through so that it crosses at most V / 2 edges near that vertex.
This requires a total of at most u(V / 2 + 1) type 2 elementary moves, and uV + 2
elementary moves of both types. The number of segments on the curve has now
been increased to at most s + uV / 2 + u < s + uV .
Next we isotop the intersection of α with each triangle to a union of basic
arcs. This can increase the number of segments by at most a fac tor of three, to
3(s+uV ) and requires less than 4( s+U V ) elementary moves by Lemma 5.2. We
can do similar moves on β , resulting in new curves α and β which are transversely
intersecting basic curves with a total of at most 6( s + uV ) segments. Note that
the length of a basic curve is between one third and one half of the number of
segments it contains, therefore α ∪ β has length at most 3( s + uV ). We now
apply Lemma 5.7, isotoping the curves together using at most 17[3(s + uV )]4u3
elementary moves. We can bound V by u, obtaining a bound of at most
u2 + 2 + 4(s + u2) + 1377[(s + u2)]4u3 < 211(s + u2)4u3
elementary moves. □
6 Proof of Theorem 1.2
We combine the results of §2–§5 to prove Theorem 1.2.
35
Proof of Theorem 1.2: To prove Theorem 1.2, we ﬁrst construct a compact
triangulated P L submanifold MK of M obtained by removing a solid torus
neighborhood of K. We barycentrically subdivide M twice and construct a
new triangulated manifold MK = M − RK , by removing the interior of a
regular neighborhood RK of K. The boundary of MK consists of a subdivision
of the original boundary ∂M plus a 2-torus ∂R K, the peripheral torus. The
manifolds MK and RK contain between them 576 t tetrahedra. As outlined in
§3, we deform the original knot K across an annulus by elementary moves to
a longitude K1 on the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K. Then we deform K1 on the
peripheral torus by elementary moves to the boundary K2 of the embedded
normal disk given by Haken’s Theorem 3.1. Finally we deform t he curve K2
across this disk using elementary moves to a triangle.
We count elementary moves. By Lemma 3.4 the normal disk with K2 as
boundary contains at most 2 8·576t+6 = 2 4608t+6 triangles, and the number of
edges |K2|of K2 is at most
|K2| ≤ 24608t+7 < 24609t = s2 . (6.15)
Also by Lemma 3.4 it takes at most 2 4608t+7 elementary moves to transform K2
to a triangle.
By Theorem 4.1 the longitude K1 consists of at most
|K1| ≤ 21858(576t)+1 < 21070209t = s1 (6.16)
edges, and the isotopy from K to K1 requires at most the same number of
elementary moves.
It remains to bound the number of elementary moves needed to c arry K1 to
K2, using Theorem 5.1. We note that K1 is isotopic to K2 if properly oriented.
Theorem 5.1 applies with s = max( s1, s2) = s1 to yield a bound of at most
211(s + u2)4u3 elementary moves taking K1 to K2, where u is the number of
triangles on the peripheral torus. Since u ≤ 576t < 210t, Corollary 5.1 yields a
bound of 2 107t− 1 for the number of elementary moves taking K1 to K2. For the
three steps together we obtain a bound of 2 4609t + 21070209t + 2107t− 1 < 2107t.
36
□
Remark. The assumption K ⊆ Interior (M ) was used to allow the peripheral
torus RK to be constructible by two barycentric subdivisions and to h ave ∂R K
disjoint from ∂M . For the general case that K ⊆ M , we could proceed by
barycentrically subdividing M twice, then isotoping K oﬀ the boundary ∂M
to a “parallel” knot K ′′ contained strictly in the interior of M ′′, using O(t)
elementary moves. Now Theorem 1.2 applies to K ′′in ( M ′′, ∂M ′′).
7 Reidemeister moves and elementary moves in
R3
The remainder of the paper is concerned with 3-manifolds emb edded in R3,
and is devoted to proving the Reidemeister move bound of Theo rem 1.1.
We outline the proof of Theorem 1.1. We have given a knot diagr am D with
n vertices. We use it to construct a triangulated P L manifold M embedded in
R3 which contains a knot K in its 1-skeleton whose projection on the xy-plane in
R3 is the knot diagram D. In section 8 we show that such a manifold M can be
constructed using O(n) tetrahedra. Now Theorem 1.2 shows that we can isotop
K to a trivial knot using 2 c3n elementary moves. We project these elementary
moves down onto the xy-plane and obtain a sequence of Reidemeister moves.
The proof is completed by bounding the number of Reidemeiste r moves in terms
of elementary moves, which we do below.
In the rest of this section we describe Reidemeister moves an d relate them
to elementary moves. We recall basic facts about knot and lin k diagrams.
A projection of a link in R3 into a plane is regular if all crossings are in
general position, and at most 2 edges intersect the pre-imag e of any point.
Corresponding to a regular projection of a link is a link diagram . This is a
labeled planar graph having the following properties:
(i) Any connected component of D with no vertices is an (isolated) loop.
37
(ii) Each vertex has exactly four adjacent edges, with two ed ges labeled “undercrossing” and two labeled “overcrossing” at the vertex.
(iii) The labeling prescribes a cyclic ordering of edges at e ach vertex, and “overcrossing edges” are adjacent to “undercrossing edges” in th is ordering.
Conversely, for any labeled planar graph D satisfying (i)–(iii) there exists an
unoriented link L having projection D. We note that the cyclic ordering of
vertices in (iii) actually speciﬁes a planar embedding of th e graph D, since it
determines the faces of the planar embedding.
A link component in a link diagram D is obtained by tracing a closed path of
edges such that each pair of consecutive edges match at their common vertex,
either both overcrossing or both undercrossing. The order of D is the number
of components it contains. A link diagram component of D is a connected component of the underlying graph; it can be the union of several link components.
The crossing measure |D|of a link diagram is
|D|= #(vertices) + #(link diagram components) − 1 . (7.17)
A knot diagram is a link diagram that consists of one link component. A
trivial knot diagram is a knot diagram that has no vertices. If D is a knot
diagram, then |D|is the crossing number of the knot projection.
Lemma 7.1 If a polygonal link L has regular projection D, then
|D| ≤ |L|2 . (7.18)
Proof. The number of vertices |L|is at least as large as the number of distinct
line segments it contains. Since line segments project to li ne segments, each pair
of line segments produces at most one crossing. There are les s than |L|2 pairs.
Furthermore line segments that project into diﬀerent conne cted components of
|D|cannot produce any crossings. Thus the number of noninterse cting pairs of
line segments is at least #(components of D) − 1, so 7.18 follows. □
The bound 7.18 is the correct order of magnitude, because one can easily
construct a sequence of knots K with |K|→∞ , which have the property that
38
|D|> 1
2 |K|2. There is no upper bound for |L|in terms of |D|, but there does
exist a link L with a projection having diagram D, with |L| ≤ c|D|, see [12,
Lemma 5.1] and §3.
Reidemeister moves are local moves on link diagrams that are analogous to
elementary moves. They convert a link diagram D to another link diagram D′
by a local change in its structure. For unoriented links ther e are four kinds of
Reidemeister moves, examples of which are pictured in Figur e 13, see one of [21,
p. 48], [1],[6],[],[25]. (For oriented links there are more Reidemeister moves, see
Wu [33].)
Figure 13: Reidemeister moves of types 1, 2 and 3.
We call two knot diagrams D1 and D2 equivalent if and only if one can
be converted into the other by a ﬁnite sequence of Reidemeist er moves. This
relation corresponds to knot equivalence: Knots K1 and K2 have knot diagrams
D1 and D2 that are equivalent if and only if D1 and D2 are equivalent.
Reidemeister moves on a link diagram D are related to elementary moves
on a link L whose projection is D, but the correspondence of moves is not
one-to-one.
Lemma 7.2 Let L be a polygonal link and suppose that it has diagram D as
regular projection on a plane. Let L′ be a link derived from L by an elementary
move of type (2) or (2′), and suppose that it has regular projection D′ on the
same plane. Then there is a sequence of at most 2|L|+ 2|D|Reidemeister moves
that converts D to D′.
39
Proof. As a line segment is moved aﬃnely in R3 with one end ﬁxed, its
projection intersects the projection of any vertex of the po lygonal link L in
at most one point. Therefore it can generate at most one type I or type II
Reidemeister move involving the projection of that vertex. The number of
vertices is bounded by |L|. Similarly, each pair of crossing segments in D can
produce at most one type III Reidemeister move. Since two lin e segments are
moved in a type (2) or (2 ′) elementary move, this yields at most 2 |L|+ 2|D|
Reidemeister moves. □
The bound of Lemma 7.2 is nearly best possible.
We use these lemmas to prove a bound for Reidemeister moves in terms of
elementary moves.
Theorem 7.1 Let L and L′ be polygonal links each consisting of at most n
line segments and suppose that D and D′ are link diagrams obtained by regular
projection of L and L′ on a ﬁxed plane. If L can be transformed to L′ using k
elementary moves, then D can be transformed to D′ using at most 2k(n+ 1
2 k+1)2
Reidemeister moves.
Proof. Let L = L0, L1, L2, . . . , L k = L′ be the set of intermediate links
occurring in the sequence of elementary moves, and let Di denote the projection
of Li on the ﬁxed plane. We may assume that all projections are regu lar, by
applying a a transversality argument and inﬁnitesimally mo ving the plane of
projection [6, Prop. 1.12]. Since an elementary move change s the number of
vertices by at most one, and |L0|, |Lk| ≤ n, we have, for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, that
|Li| ≤ min(n + i, n + k − i) ≤ n + 1
2 k . (7.19)
Lemma 7.1 gives
|Di| ≤ |Li|2 ≤ (n + 1
2 k)2 = n2 + nk + k2
4 . (7.20)
Thus we obtain
2|Li|+ 2|Di| ≤ 2(n + 1
2 k + 1)2 ,
and applying Lemma 7.2 to each Li separately yields the upper bound 2 k(n +
1
2 k + 1)2. □
40
8 Triangulation of knot complements in R3
In this section we construct a triangulated 3-manifold MK which is a knot
complement in a ball embedded in R3. That is, MK = S3 − (RK ∪ B), in which
RK is an open regular neighborhood of the knot K, B is an open ball containing
the point at inﬁnity in its interior, and ¯RK ∩ ¯B = ∅. The manifold MK has
boundary ∂M K = ∂R K ∪∂B which consists of two connected components, which
are topologically a 2-sphere and a torus. As in §2, we call such a manifold MK
a truncated knot complement .
We carry out this construction more generally for link diagr ams, as it requires
no extra work. Given a link diagram L with crossing measure n, we construct a
triangulated manifold M in R3 which contains O(n) tetrahedra and has a link
L in its 1-skeleton which has a regular projection that gives t he link diagram L.
Theorem 8.1 Given a link diagram L of crossing measure n, one can construct
a triangulated convex polyhedron P in R3 such that:
(i) The triangulation contains at most 840n tetrahedra.
(ii) Every vertex in the triangulation is a lattice point (x, y, z) ∈ Z3, with
0 ≤ x ≤ 30n, 0 ≤ y < 30n and − 6 ≤ z ≤ 6.
(iii) There is a link L embedded in the 1-skeleton of the triangulation which
lies entirely in the interior of P , and whose orthogonal projection on the
plane z = 0 is regular and is a link diagram isomorphic to L.
Proof. The link diagram L comes with a topological planar embedding which
determines the faces. We begin by adding extra vertices to L. To each edge or
non-isolated loop we add two new vertices of degree 2, which s plits it into three
edges. To each isolated loop we add three new vertices of degr ee 2, making it an
isolated triangle. The resulting labeled graph G is still planar, has no loops or
multiple edges, and has at most 5 n vertices. (The worst case consists of several
disjoint single crossing projections.) Let m denote the number of vertices of G,
41
and call the m − n vertices added special vertices. Note that each vertex of the
original graph has associated to it four distinct special ve rtices.
Using the topological planar embedding of G, we next add extra edges to
triangulate each face of G, obtaining a topologically embedded triangulated
planar graph G′. The graph G′ has m vertices and 2 m − 4 bounded triangular
faces, and the unbounded face is also a triangle. We next enca se the graph
G′ in a triangulated planar graph H′ with m + 3 vertices and 2 m + 2 bounded
triangular faces, by framing the outside triangular face wi th a larger triangle and
then adding 6 edges to subdivide the resulting concentric re gion into 6 triangles,
obtaining G′′. See Figure 14.
Figure 14: Triangulating a knot projection.
Our next goal is to replace the topological embedding of G′′in the plane with
a straight-line embedding. In 1952 Fary showed that straigh t-line embeddings
always exist, and a recent result of de Frajsseix, Pach and Po llack [7] states that
the vertices can be chosen to lie in a small rectangular grid o f integer lattice
points. Their results imply that there exists a planar embed ding of H′ whose
vertices V (H′) lie in the plane z = − 1, and are contained in the grid
{(x, y, − 1) : 0 ≤ x, y ≤ 10n − 1 ; x, y ∈ Z} ,
and all edges of the graph H′ are straight line segments.
Next we make an identical copy H′′of H′ on the plane z = 1 with H′′=
H′ + (0, 0, 2), and vertex set V (H′′) = V (H′) + (0, 0, 2). We now consider the
polyhedron P ′ which is the convex hull of V (H′) and V (H′′). It is a triangular
42
prism, because the outside face of H′ is a triangle. We add m1 vertical edges
connecting each vertex v ∈ V (H′) to its copy v+(0, 0, 1) ∈ V (H′′). Let E denote
these edges, together with all the edges in H′ and H′′. Using these edges, the
polyhedron P ′ decomposes into 2 m+ 2 triangular prisms {Qj : 1 ≤ j ≤ 2m− 4},
with the top and bottom faces of each being congruent triangu lar faces of H′
and H′′.
We next triangulate P ′ by dissecting each of the 2 m + 2 triangular prisms
into 14 tetrahedra, as follows. We subdivide each vertical r ectangular face into
four triangles using its diagonals. Then we cone each rectan gular face to the
centroid of P ′, and note that the centroid lies in the plane z = 0. We add 4
new vertices to each prism, one on each rectangular face and o ne in the center.
The point of this subdivision is that the triangulations of a djacent prisms are
compatible. Note also that all new vertices added lie in the l attice 1
3 Z2.
Let E ′ denote all the edges in the union of these triangulated prism s. We
identify the link diagram G with the graph G embedded in H′. We next observe
that there is a polygonal link L embedded in the edge set E ′ whose projection is
the link diagram L. We insist that any edge in D that runs to an undercrossing
have its vertex which is an undercrossing be in the plane z = − 1, while any edge
that runs to an overcrossing have the overcrossing vertex in the plane z = 1.
Each such edge goes from one of the n original vertices of L to a special vertex
adjacent to that vertex. Edges that do not meet vertices labe led overcrossing
or undercrossing are assigned to the z = − 1 plane. The edge corresponding to
an edge running from the z = − 1 to the z = 1 plane is contained in one of
the diagonals added to a prism. The resulting embedding L in P ′ has a regular
orthogonal projection onto the ( x, y)-plane, since no edges are vertical and only
transverse double points occur as singularities in the proj ection. Note that no
edge of L touches the outer triangle of H′ because all edges project to the graph
G′ contained strictly inside H′. This will be important for property (iii).
The knot edges lie in the upper and lower boundary of P ′, but do not touch
its sides. To have them not touch the boundary we take two addi tional copies of
P ′ and glue one to its top, along the plane z = 1, and one to its bottom, along
43
the plane z = − 1. The knot now lies entirely in the interior of the resulting
polyhedron P ′′. All the vertices added in this construction lie in 1
3 Z2. The total
number of tetrahedra used in triangulating P ′′is 84( m + 1), which is at most
420(n + 1), or at most 840 n for n ≥ 1.
Now triple all coordinates ( x, y, z) → (3x, 3y, 3z) to obtain a triangulated
polytope P = 3P ′′with integer vertices, with a triangulation that satisﬁes ( i)–
(iii). □
Remark. (1). The construction in Theorem 8.1 can be eﬀectively compu ted
in time O(n log n) using the Hopcroft-Tarjan planarity algorithms [16] and t he
embedding algorithm of de Frajsseix, Pach and Pollack [7, Se ction 4].
(2). One can ask whether a polygonal knot K in R3 that consists of n line
segments can be embedded in the 1-skeleton of some triangula ted polyhedron
that uses O(n) tetrahedra. We do not know if this can always be done. There
exist polygonal knots whose planar projections in any direc tion have at least
Ω(n2) crossings. Avis and El Gindy [3] showed that a set of n points in general
position in R3 can be embedded as vertices of a triangulation of their conve x
hull using O(n) tetrahedra, but that in the general case Ω( n2) tetrahedra are
sometimes needed.
9 Proof of Theorem 1.1
We combine the earlier results to prove Theorem 1.1 with an ex plicit bound
on the number of Reidemeister moves required to isotop an unk not to the trivial
projection.
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Applying Theorem 8.1 to the knot diagram D yields
a triangulated convex polyhedron M embedded in R3 with t tetrahedra, where,
t ≤ 840n ,
44
and with a knot K embedded in the 1-skeleton of the interior of M that projects
to D. The hypotheses of Theorem 1.2 are satisﬁed for M , hence there is a
sequence of at most 2 c2t elementary moves transforming K to the trivial knot
in M , with c2 = 10 7. Now Theorem 7.1 gives a bound of at most
2c2t
(
6 ·840n + 1
2 ·2c2t + 1
) 2
. (9.21)
Reidemeister moves, since K contains at most 6 ·840n line segments.
The bound (9.21) yields the desired bound of the form 2 c1n for an explicit
constant c1. Using the value c2 = 10 7 from the proof of Theorem 1.2, one ﬁnds
that c1 = 10 11 suﬃces. □
References
[1] C. Adams, The Knot Book. An elementary introduction to the mathematic al
theory of knots , W. H. Freeman, New York, 1994.
[2] J. W. Alexander and G. B. Briggs, On types of knotted curves , Ann. Math.,
28 (1926/27), 562–586.
[3] D. Avis and H. El Gindy, Triangulating Point Sets in Space , Disc. & Comp.
Geom., 2 (1987), 99–111.
[4] J. Birman and M.D. Hirsch, Recognizing the unknot, preprint, 1997.
[5] J. Birman and W. Menasco, Studying links via closed braids V: The unlink,
Trans. AMS, 329, 1992, 585–606.
[6] G. Burde and H. Zieschang, Knots, de Gruyter 1985.
[7] H. de Frajsseix, J. Pach and R. Pollack, How to draw a planar graph on a
grid, Combinatorica, 10 (1990), 41–51.
[8] S. Galatolo, On a problem in eﬀective knot theory, Rendiconti dell Accademia dei Lincei (to appear).
45
[9] L. Goeritz, Bemerkungen zur knotentheorie, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg, 10 (1934), 201–210.
[10] W. Haken, Theorie der Normalﬂachen, ein Isotopie Kriterium f¨ ur ein
Kreis, Acta Math., 105 (1961), 245–375.
[11] J. Hass, Algorithms for recognizing knots and 3-manifolds, to appear in
Chaos, Fractals and Solitons.
[12] J. Hass, J. C. Lagarias and N. Pippenger, The computational complexity of
knot and link problems, preprint, 1997.
[13] J. Hass, J. C. Lagarias and N. Pippenger, The computational complexity of
knot and link problems, preliminary report, Proc. 38th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, (1997), 172–181.
[14] J. Hass and G. P. Scott, Intersections of curves on surfaces, Israel Math.
J., 51 (1985), 90–120.
[15] G. Hempel, 3-Manifolds, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ, 1976.
[16] J. E. Hopcroft and R. E. Tarjan, Eﬃcient planarity testing, J. Assoc. Comp.
Mach., 21 (1974), 549–568.
[17] J.F.P. Hudson, Piecewise-Linear Topology, W.A. Benjamin Inc. 1969.
[18] W. Jaco and H. Rubinstein, P L Equivariant Surgery and Invariant Decompositions of 3-Manifolds, Advances in Math., 73 (1989), 149–191.
[19] W. Jaco and J. L. Tollefson, Algorithms for the complete decomposition of
a closed 3-manifold, Ill. J. Math., 39 (1995), 358–406.
[20] H. Kneser, Geschlossene Flachen in dreidimensionalen Mannigfaltigk eiten,
Jahresbericht Math. Verein., 28 (1929), 248–260.
[21] K. Murasugi, Knot Theory and Its Applications , Birkhauser, Boston MA,
1996.
46
[22] H. Reidemeister, Knoten und Gruppen , Abh. Math. Sem., Univ. Hamburg,
5 (1926), 7–23.
[23] H. Reidemeister, Elementare Begr¨ undang der Knotentheorie, Abh. Math.
Sem. Univ. Hamburg, 5 (1926), 24–32.
[24] H. Reidemeister, Knotentheorie, Springer: Berlin 1932; Chelsea; New York,
1948. (English translation: Knot Theory , BCS Associates, Moscow, ID
1984.)
[25] D. Rolfsen, Knot and Links , Publish or Perish Inc., Berkeley CA, 1976.
[26] C.P. Rourke and B.J. Sanderson, Introduction to Piecewise-Linear Topology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1982.
[27] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming , John Wiley and
Sons, New York, 1986.
[28] H. Schubert, Bestimmung der Primfactor zerlegung von Verkettungen,
Math. Z., 76 (1961), 116–148.
[29] A. Seb¨ o, Hilbert bases, Caraetheodory’s theorem and combinatorial optimization, in Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization, R.
Kannan and W. R. Pulleybank, Eds., U. Waterloo Press, 1990, 4 31–455.
[30] D. J. A. Welsh, Complexity: Knots, Colourings and Counting , Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 1993.
[31] D. J. A. Welsh, The complexity of knots , in Quo Vadis, Graph Theory?, J.
Gimbel, J. Kennedy and L. V. Quintoo, eds., North-Holland, A msterdam,
1993, 159–173. (Also: Annals Disc. Math., 55 (1993), 159–173.)
[32] D. J. A. Welsh, Knots and braids: some algorithmic questions, in Graph
structure Theory, Seattle, W A 1991, Contemporary Math. Vol . 147, AMS,
Providence RI, 1993, 109–123.
47
[33] F. Y. Wu, Knot Theory and Statistical Mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys., 64
(1992), 1099–1131.
email: hass@math.ucdavis.edu
jcl@research.att.com
address: Prof. J. Hass
Dept. of Mathematics
Univ. of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
Dr. J. C. Lagarias
Room C235, AT&T Labs–Research
180 Park Avenue
Florham Park, NJ 07932-0971
48