ˆh(0) (assuming ˆh is continuous at 0). Let Λ 2, Λ 8, and Λ 24 denote the hexagonal lattice in R2, the E8 root lattice in R8, and the Leech lattice in R24, respectively. Conjecture 9.4. Let n ∈ { 2, 8, 24}, and let f : (0 , ∞ ) → R be completely monotonic and satisfy f (x) = O ( |x|− n/ 2− ε ) as |x| → ∞ for some ε > 0. Then there exists a function h that satisﬁes the hypotheses of Proposition 9.3 and proves t hat Λn has the least f -potential energy of any periodic conﬁguration in Rn with its density. One consequence of this conjecture is that these lattices ar e universally optimal conﬁgurations in Euclidean space. That appears to be a rare p roperty, which provably fails for lattices in dimensions 3, 5, 6, and 7. The u nique optimal lattices in those dimensions are the A3, D5, E6, and E7 root lattices (see [Mar]). Each UNIVERSALLY OPTIMAL DISTRIBUTION OF POINTS ON SPHERES 139 of these lattices has higher energy than its dual lattice for the potential function f (x) = e− x, when both lattices are rescaled to have unit density. Montgomery proved in [Mo] that the hexagonal lattice is univ ersally optimal among all lattices in R2, but that is a weaker assertion than universal optimality among all periodic point conﬁgurations. Sarnak and Str¨ omb ergsson conjectured in [SS] that D4, E8, and the Leech lattice are universally optimal among lattic es and proved that they are local optima. Perhaps one could combine their theorem with the techniques in this paper and [CK1] to prove that E8 and Λ 24 are the global minima among lattices in their dimensions. If true, Conjecture 9.4 implies that E8 and the Leech lattice are the densest sphere packings in their dimensions, by using the potential function f (r) = 1 /r s with s large. (The density of a sphere packing is the fraction of spa ce covered by the spheres; unfortunately this terminology conﬂicts with the density of a point conﬁguration. We will refer to these numbers as the “packing densit y” and “point density” to avoid confusion.) The potential energy of any periodic pa cking is asymptotic to K r2s min as s → ∞ , where rmin is the smallest distance between distinct points and K is the average number of points at distance rmin from a point in the packing (i.e., the average kissing number if one centers balls of radius rmin/ 2 at the points of the arrangement to form a sphere packing). Universal optima lity implies that rmin must be as large as possible for a periodic conﬁguration of po int density 1, which means the packing density is maximized. Thus, Conjecture 9. 4 implies that no periodic packing can exceed the packing density of E8 or the Leech lattice, and therefore no packing can (see Appendix A of [CE]). Furthermore, Conjecture 9.4 implies that E8 and the Leech lattice are the unique densest periodic packings in R8 and R24. In the notation used above, any equally dense periodic packing must have at least as large an average kissing number K, or the potential energy would be lower. Because E8 and Λ 24 have the greatest possible kissing numbers in their dimensions and those kiss ing conﬁgurations are unique (see Chapters 13 and 14 of [CS]), the kissing conﬁgura tions in the hypothetical packing are determined up to orthogonal transform ations. However, those orthogonal transformations may be nontrivial, so it is not o bvious that the packing is uniquely determined. Lemma 9.5. For n = 8 or n = 24 , there is a unique sphere packing in Rn such that each kissing conﬁguration is the Λn kissing conﬁguration. Proof. Without loss of generality, suppose one sphere is centered a t a point in Λ n and the spheres tangent to it are centered at the nearest poin ts in Λ n. We must prove that each sphere is centered at a point of Λ n. Call a sphere center good if it is in Λ n and the same is true for all spheres tangent to it, and call one point a neighbor of another if they are the centers of tangent spher es. By assumption, at least one point is good; call it the origin. We will prove th at all neighbors of good points are also good. It follows that all points in the pa cking are good. To see why, suppose x is not good with |x|minimal. Then x must have a neighbor y with |y|< |x|, since otherwise a suitable scalar multiple of x (chosen between x and the origin to match the minimal distance of the packing) coul d be included with the neighbors of x to increase the kissing number in Rn; the reason is that every 140 HENRY COHN AND ABHINA V KUMAR neighbor of x would be on or outside the sphere of radius |x|and hence at least as far from the new point as x is. The smaller neighbor y is good by assumption, which implies that x is good. It remains to prove that all neighbors of good points are good . Suppose x is good and y is a neighbor of x. We must show that there is a unique way to arrange the neighbors of y (namely, as points of Λ n). The positions of the common neighbors of x and y are already determined, because x is good. It would suﬃce to show that every isometry of Rn that ﬁxes x and y and preserves the set of common neighbors must preserve Λ n, because any two possible kissing arrangements about y are related by such an isometry. (They are related by some iso metry ﬁxing y by the uniqueness of the kissing conﬁguration. Because the s ymmetry group acts transitively on the neighbors (see Lemma 1.10 in [Eb, p. 25] a nd Theorem 27 in [CS, p. 288]), we may assume that x is ﬁxed as well, and it follows that the set of common neighbors is also preserved.) For n = 8 we will show that this is true; for n = 24 it is false, but we will prove a slightly weaker statement that will still suﬃce. Without loss of generality, we can translate the origin so th at y = 0. When n = 8, x and its 56 common neighbors with 0 span E8, so every orthogonal transformation that preserves x and the common neighbors clearly preserves E8. That completes the proof by showing that the kissing arrangements about two neighbors can only be in one orientation relative to each other. When n = 24, x and its 4600 common neighbors with 0 do not span Λ 24 (their span cannot contain any vector that has an odd inner product w ith x). Instead, they span a sublattice L of index 2, as is not hard to check using Figure 4.12 in [CS, p. 133] (with x = (4 , − 4, 0, . . . , 0)/ √ 8). This lattice contains all the