makes an angle larger than 30 0 with an edge of E, and arcs of type 2 are disjoint from the smaller equilateral tria ngle. Now let E′ be any triangle and ﬁx a linear map from E to E′. A basic arc in E′ is deﬁned to be the image of a basic arc in E. Figure 9: Type 1 and type 2 basic arcs. A basic curve in a triangulated surface is a curve which meets each triangl e in a union of basic arcs. Lemma 5.1 Any two basic arcs in a triangle with distinct endpoints whic h lie on the interiors of the edges of E intersect in either zero or one point. Any collection of disjoint embedded curves in a triangle can be i sotoped, without moving their endpoints, to a collection of embedded basic ar cs. Proof. Two basic arcs with distinct endpoints intersect if and only if their endpoints link on the boundary of the triangle. Any family of disjoint embedded arcs in a triangle is isotopic, rel boundary, to any other suc h family. □ Figure 10: Any set of arcs can be isotoped to a set of basic arcs . A basic move of a basic curve in a triangulated surface is deﬁned to be one of the following curve isotopies, each of which produces a ne w basic curve: 26 1 2 3 Figure 11: Basic move of types 1, 2 and 3. (a) Type 1. An isotopy that slides an arc of the curve that crosses an edge along that edge. (b) Type 2. An isotopy that isotops an arc of the curve that crosses an edg e of the triangulation across an adjacent vertex, and then iso tops each of the arcs of intersection with a triangle created or altered in this pr ocess to basic arcs. (c) Type 3. An isotopy that slides an arc of the curve with both endpoints on one edge of a triangle E across the 2-gon it forms with that edge. This results in the joining of two arcs in an adjacent triangle E′. If the two arcs give a closed curve in E′, the closed curve is removed. Otherwise, this new arc is isot oped in E′ to a basic arc. We count the number of elementary moves required by each basi c move. We ﬁrst look in a single triangle. Lemma 5.2 Let α = α 1 ∪ α 2 ∪ ... ∪ α n and β = β 1 ∪ β 2 ∪ ... ∪ β n each be a union of n connected polygonal arcs in a triangle with the endpoints of α i and β i 27 equal, and having a total of a and b edges respectively. Then α can be isotoped to β in the triangle using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves, and 2(a + b) elementary moves in total. Proof. We will count the number of required elementary moves in two c ases. In each case we will isotop both α and β to an intermediate curve γ , which stays close to the boundary of the triangle. To construct γ , we ﬁrst pick θ to be a positive angle which is small enough so that for any vertex v in α ∪ β which lies on an edge of the triangle and any vertex w in α ∪ β which does not lie on that edge, the angle between that edge and the line segment vw is greater than θ . Given an arc α i of α , we construct an arc γ i with the same endpoints, but with interior disjoint from α and containing just two segments. If α i runs between distinct edges of the triangle then it cuts oﬀ a subdi sk containing a single vertex of the triangle. Construct γ i to consist of two segments, each of which makes an angle of θ with the edges going towards that vertex. By deﬁnition of θ , γ i will be disjoint from the interiors of α i and β i. If α i has both endpoints on a single edge of the triangle, then it cuts oﬀ a su bdisk containing no vertices and a segment of one edge. Construct γ i to consist of two segments contained in this disk, each of which makes an angle of θ with its edge. Again, γ i will be disjoint from the interiors of α i and β i. (1) α and β are connected. If α does not meet both sides of β , then the region between them can be triangulated with a + b − 2 triangles, which can be used to isotop α to β using a + b − 2 type 2 elementary moves. If they intersect, then applying the previous argument shows that each can be isotoped to the d isjoint curve γ by using a and b type 2 elementary moves respectively. It follows that we can always isotop α to β using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves, and 2( a + b) elementary moves of all types. (2) α and β are not connected. 28 We will construct an isotopy from α to β which keeps the curves embedded at each stage. Let ai be the number of segments of α i, so that ∑n i=1 ai = a. Each arc α i of α cuts oﬀ a disk meeting exactly one vertex of the triangle in which it lies, if it runs between distinct edges of the tria ngle, or no vertices if it runs from an edge back to that edge. An arc of α is said to be outermost if it cuts oﬀ a disk which contains no other arcs of α . Let α i be outermost. Then γ i is disjoint from all the other arcs in α ∪ β and meets α i ∪ β i only in their endpoints. The number of segments of γ i is two, and γ = ⋃γ i is embedded. We can isotop the outermost arc α i of α to the arc γ i with the same endpoints without ever introducing any new intersections in α , since the other arcs in α lie on the other side of α i from γ i. This isotopy requires at most ai type 2 elementary moves, as in the previous case. We then repeat for an outermost arc α j among the collection of arcs of α − {α i}. This isotopy takes place between α j and γ j, and in particular never meets γ i. Repeating for all arcs in α , we can isotope the entire collection α to γ using at most ∑n i=1 ai = a type 2 elementary moves. Similarly, we can isotop β to γ using at most b type 2 elementary moves. It follows that we can isotop α to β using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves. The total number of elementary moves required in these isoto pies is at most twice the number of type 2 elementary moves.