, we construct an arc γ i with the same endpoints, but with interior disjoint from α and containing just two segments. If α i runs between distinct edges of the triangle then it cuts oﬀ a subdi sk containing a single vertex of the triangle. Construct γ i to consist of two segments, each of which makes an angle of θ with the edges going towards that vertex. By deﬁnition of θ , γ i will be disjoint from the interiors of α i and β i. If α i has both endpoints on a single edge of the triangle, then it cuts oﬀ a su bdisk containing no vertices and a segment of one edge. Construct γ i to consist of two segments contained in this disk, each of which makes an angle of θ with its edge. Again, γ i will be disjoint from the interiors of α i and β i. (1) α and β are connected. If α does not meet both sides of β , then the region between them can be triangulated with a + b − 2 triangles, which can be used to isotop α to β using a + b − 2 type 2 elementary moves. If they intersect, then applying the previous argument shows that each can be isotoped to the d isjoint curve γ by using a and b type 2 elementary moves respectively. It follows that we can always isotop α to β using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves, and 2( a + b) elementary moves of all types. (2) α and β are not connected. 28 We will construct an isotopy from α to β which keeps the curves embedded at each stage. Let ai be the number of segments of α i, so that ∑n i=1 ai = a. Each arc α i of α cuts oﬀ a disk meeting exactly one vertex of the triangle in which it lies, if it runs between distinct edges of the tria ngle, or no vertices if it runs from an edge back to that edge. An arc of α is said to be outermost if it cuts oﬀ a disk which contains no other arcs of α . Let α i be outermost. Then γ i is disjoint from all the other arcs in α ∪ β and meets α i ∪ β i only in their endpoints. The number of segments of γ i is two, and γ = ⋃γ i is embedded. We can isotop the outermost arc α i of α to the arc γ i with the same endpoints without ever introducing any new intersections in α , since the other arcs in α lie on the other side of α i from γ i. This isotopy requires at most ai type 2 elementary moves, as in the previous case. We then repeat for an outermost arc α j among the collection of arcs of α − {α i}. This isotopy takes place between α j and γ j, and in particular never meets γ i. Repeating for all arcs in α , we can isotope the entire collection α to γ using at most ∑n i=1 ai = a type 2 elementary moves. Similarly, we can isotop β to γ using at most b type 2 elementary moves. It follows that we can isotop α to β using at most a + b type 2 elementary moves. The total number of elementary moves required in these isoto pies is at most twice the number of type 2 elementary moves. □ Deﬁne the length of a P L curve transverse to the 1-skeleton of a triangulated surface to be the number of edges of the 1-skeleton that it cro sses, counted with multiplicity. Lemma 5.3 A basic move in a surface with a triangulation of valence at mo st V can be realized by at most 28 elementary moves for a type 1 basi c move, 6V + 24 elementary moves for a type 2 basic move, and 22 elementary mo ves for a type 3 basic move. In all cases 17V elementary moves suﬃce. 29 Proof. We count the number of elementary moves required for each typ e of basic move. Lemma 5.2 implies that a type 1 basic move requires at most 14 e lementary moves in each of the two triangles meeting the edge along whic h the curve is isotoped. The type 2 basic move can be done in the following sequence of s teps. (1) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the arc in a neighborhoo d of an edge to pass through the adjacent vertex. (2) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the curve to run along ed ges in a neighborhood of the adjacent vertex. (3) V − 2 type 2 elementary moves slide the arc over a neighborhood of the vertex in each adjacent triangle. (4) At most 7 type 2 elementary moves slide the arc to basic cur ves in each of the original two triangles, by Lemma 5.2. (5) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the arc to basic curves i n each of the V − 2 triangles where new intersections were introduced. Summing, this basic move requires less than 3 V + 12 type 2 elementary moves, and 6 V + 24 in total. The type three basic move requires (1) One type 2 elementary move to slide the arc to coincide wit h a subarc of its adjacent edge. (2) At most 10 type 2 elementary moves slide the resulting arc to a basic curve with the same endpoints in the adjacent triangle, by an application of Lemma 5.2. This sums to at most 11 elementary moves of type 2 and 22 elementary moves of all types. Since V ≥ 3, in all cases 17 V elementary moves suﬃce. □ If two basic curves are isotopic using only basic moves of typ e 1, we say that they are parallel basic curves. 30 Figure 12: Elementary moves for a type 2 basic move. Lemma 5.4 Let α and β be two parallel basic curves with total length ℓ. Then α can be isotoped to coincide with β by ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1. Similarly, α can be isotoped across β by ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1. Proof. Each of α and β has length ℓ/ 2 and they intersect each triangle of the surface in pairs of parallel basic arcs. Using ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1, we can either move the intersections of α along each edge to coincide with the intersection of β with that edge, or move the intersections past to the other si de of β . □ Let α and β be intersecting simple closed curves in general position on a surface F . A 2-gon is a subdisk of F whose boundary consists of one subarc of each of α and β . A 2-gon is innermost if no arc of α or β meets its interior. In some cases, it can be shown that curves with excess intersect ion create innermost 2-gons. This is analyzed