result of Hass, Lagar ias and Pippenger [12] implies that S can be chosen to contain at most 2 8t+6 triangles. We present 6 this argument for completeness in §2. Its boundary ∂S is a curve K2. K2 is isotopic to K within ¯RK. There is a sequence of at most 2 8t+7 elementary moves which deform K2 to a triangle across triangles in S. This is carried out in §3. It remains to relate K2 to K by elementary moves. In §3 we construct a curve K1 isotopic to K in RK which is a longitude, a curve on the peripheral torus, ∂R K, which bounds an embedded disk in MK but not inside the peripheral torus. Such curves exist if K is unknotted in M . In §4 we construct a longitude K2 that lies in the 1-skeleton of the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K, consists of at most O(2c3t) line segments and can be isotoped to K using at most O(2c3t) elementary moves. In §5 we prove results which are used to show that there is a sequence of at most O(2c4t) elementary moves which deform K1 to K2 while remaining entirely in the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K. In §6 we combine these results to complete the proof. All the const ants and bounds above are explicitly computed. The proof of Theorem 1.2 in eﬀect deforms the original knot K to a trivial knot with elementary moves made inside three surfaces: an an nulus is used to go from K to the longitude K1, a 2-torus is used to go from K1 to the boundary of a normal disk K2, and a disk is used to go from K2 to the trivial knot. 3 Normal surfaces and elementary moves across an essential disk In this section we assume given a compact P L 3-manifold with (possibly empty) boundary ( M, ∂M ), which is triangulated using t tetrahedra. We will work with a knot K embedded in the 1-skeleton of Interior( M ). By barycentrically subdividing M twice, we obtain a manifold ( M ′′, ∂M ′′) in which K has a regular neighborhood RK. The regular neighborhood, obtained by taking the closed star of K in M ′′, is a solid torus with ∂R K disjoint from ∂M . We let MK = (M ′′\RK) ∪ ∂R K and note that its boundary ∂M K = ∂M ′′∪ ∂R K. We call the manifold ( MK, ∂M K) with ∂R K marked a truncated knot complement 7 for K. A meridian on the peripheral torus ∂R K is an oriented simple closed curve µ whose homology class [ µ ] in H1(∂R, Z) generates the kernel of the map j∗ : H1(∂R K, Z)→ H1(RK , Z), where j : ∂R K֒→RK is the inclusion map. Equivalently, it is a simple closed curve which bounds a disk in RK but not in ∂R K. A longitude on the peripheral torus ∂R K is an oriented simple closed curve λ which intersects a meridian transversely at a single point a nd whose homology class [ λ ] in H1(∂R, Z) generates the kernel of the map i∗ : H1(∂R, Z)→ H1(MK, Z), where i : ∂R K֒→MK is the inclusion map, provided that this kernel is nontrivial. Note that the kernel is always inﬁnite cyclic or tri vial [6]. If the core K of the solid torus RK is unknotted in M , then a longitude exists, and it bounds a disk in MK. For general K, a longitude does not exist when K represents an element of inﬁnite order in H1(M, Z). If M ∼ = S3, or more generally a homology sphere, then a longitude exists for any K. This curve is sometimes called a preferred longitude. When a longitude λ of ∂R K exists, its intersection number on ∂R K with a meridian µ is ± 1, and the homology classes [ µ ] and [ λ ] generate H1(∂R, Z) ∼ = Z ⊕ Z. A properly embedded disk in a 3-manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) is a disk S PL-embedded in M which satisﬁes S ∩ ∂M = ∂S . An essential disk in M is a properly embedded disk such that ∂S does not bound a disk in ∂M , i.e. the homotopy class of ∂S in π 1(∂M ) is non-trivial. Lemma 3.1 Let MK be a triangulated P L 3-manifold which is a truncated knot complement for K. Then K is unknotted if and only if MK contains an essential disk S with ∂S a longitude in ∂R K. 8 Proof. If K is unknotted then it bounds a disk which is embedded in M . This disk can be intersected with MK to give an essential P L disk S in MK. Conversely if MK contains an essential P L disk S with ∂S ⊆ ∂R K, then the boundary ∂S of S represents a longitude on ∂R K, which is isotopic to K in RK [6, p. 29, Thorem 3.1], and therefore is equivalent to K. This disk can be used to contract ∂S until it becomes a single triangle in MK. The ﬁrst homology group of a torus, Z ⊕ Z, is canonically isomorphic to its fundamental group, and the statement about the homology class of [ ∂S ] is a consequence. □ We will use normal surface theory in the form described in Jac o and Rubinstein [18, Section 1]. A normal surface S in a triangulated compact 3-manifold M is a P L-surface whose intersection with each tetrahedron in M consists of a disjoint set of elementary disks . These are either triangles and quadrilaterals. A quadrilateral consists of two triangles glued together al ong an edge lying interior to the tetrahedron. All other edges of each triangle o r quadrilateral are contained in the 2-skeleton of the tetrahedron, and do not in tersect any vertices. (See Figure 3). Figure 3: Elementary disks in a normal surface. Within each tetrahedron of M there are only 7 kinds of possible triangle or P L quadrilateral, up to P L-isotopies that map the tetrahedron to itself. These are labeled by the 7 possible ways of partitioning the vertic es of the tetrahedron into the two nonempty sets determined by cutting the tetrahe dron along the triangle or quadrilateral. W. Haken observed that the isoto py-type of a normal surface is completely determined by the number of pieces of e ach of the 7 kinds 9 that occur in each tetrahedron ∗. This can be described by a nonnegative integer vector v = v(S) ∈ Z7t, which gives the normal coordinates of S. He also showed that the set of allowable values v(S) for a normal surface S lie in a certain homogeneous rational cone CM in R7t which we call the Haken normal cone . If v = ( v1, v2, . . . , v 7t) ∈ R7t, then Haken’s normal cone is speciﬁed by a set of linear equations and inequalities of the form vi ≥ 0 , for 1 ≤ i ≤ 7t , (3.1) vi1 + vi2 = vi3 + vi4