on i) times ∫ Sn− 1 F (⟨x, y ⟩)Cn/ 2− 1 i (⟨x, y ⟩) dx, where y is an arbitrary point on Sn− 1 and of course dx denotes surface measure on Sn− 1. Choose y ∈ C . Because we know that the leading ultraspherical coeﬃcient i n F is positive, we can take i < deg(F ). Thus, deg( F ) + i ≤ 2 deg(F ) − 1. Because C is a sharp UNIVERSALLY OPTIMAL DISTRIBUTION OF POINTS ON SPHERES 125 conﬁguration, it is a spherical (2 deg( F ) − 1)-design. It follows that the integral above equals a positive constant times ∑ x∈C F (⟨x, y ⟩)Cn/ 2− 1 i (⟨x, y ⟩). By the construction of F , each term in the sum vanishes except for x = y, so the sum equals F (1)Cn/ 2− 1 i (1). Both factors are positive, as desired. □ In order to deal with the partial products j∏ i=1 (t − ti), we must express F in terms of orthogonal polynomials. Recall that the ultraspherical polynomials Cn/ 2− 1 i are orthogonal with respect to the measure (1 − t2)(n− 3)/ 2 dt on [ − 1, 1]. Call that measure dµ (t). Let p0, p 1, . . . denote the monic orthogonal polynomials with respect to (1 − t) dµ (t). These polynomials are a special case of Jacobi polynomials, but we will require only one fact abou t them: they are nonnegative linear combinations of the ultraspherical pol ynomials Cn/ 2− 1 i . That follows from Lemma 3.3 and Proposition 3.2. Lemma 6.3. There exists a constant α such that F = pm + αp m− 1. Proof. We simply need to show that F is orthogonal to all polynomials of degree at most m − 2 with respect to the measure (1 − t) dµ (t). That is equivalent to showing that (1 − t)F (t) is orthogonal to all such polynomials with respect to dµ (t). Let p be any polynomial of degree at most m − 2. Because C is a sharp conﬁguration, it must be a spherical (2 m − 1)-design. It follows as in the previous proof that ∫ (1 − t)F (t)p(t) dµ (t) equals a positive linear combination of (1 − t1)F (t1)p(t1), . . . , (1 − tm)F (tm)p(tm), (1 − 1)F (1)p(1). Each of these vanishes because F vanishes at t1, . . . , t m. Thus,∫ F (t)p(t) (1 − t)dµ (t) = 0 , as desired. □ Combining Lemma 6.3 with Theorem 3.1 shows that for j < m , the polynomial j∏ i=1 (t − ti) is strictly positive deﬁnite, and the case j = m is Lemma 6.2. Now the proof that F and F 2 are conductive concludes as in Section 5, by using Lemma 5.3 r epeatedly. We must still prove the additional uniqueness results when f is strictly completely monotonic. For that, we use the following lemma: Lemma 6.4. If a satisﬁes a(k)(t) > 0 for all k ≥ 0 and t ∈ (− 1, 1), then a(t) − h(t) has at most deg(h) + 1 roots in [− 1, 1), counted with multiplicity. 126 HENRY COHN AND ABHINA V KUMAR Proof. By Rolle’s theorem, a(t) − h(t) has at most one more root than a′(t) − h′(t). Repeated diﬀerentiation reduces to the case in which deg( h) = 0, which is trivial. □ Thus, the only roots of a(t) − h(t) in [ − 1, 1) are at t = ti for some i. It follows from the proof of Proposition 4.1 that if C′ is any other potential energy minimum with |C′|= |C|, then all inner products between distinct points of C′ occur among t1, . . . , t m. Thus C′ is a spherical code with the same parameters as C, and each sharp conﬁguration listed in Table 1 except on the last line i s known to be the unique spherical code with its parameters, up to orthogonal transformations, of course. See Appendix A for details and references. Even when the spherical code is not unique, one can still conc lude from the strict absolute monotonicity of a that C′ must be sharp. The key observation is that F 2 is strictly conductive (except in the trivial case when C consists of two antipodal points), which follows easily from Lemma 5.3. It implies tha t h is a strictly positivedeﬁnite polynomial of degree 2 m− 1. Then the sharpness in Proposition 4.1 implies that C′ must be a spherical deg( h)-design (by Theorem 5.5 in [DGS]) and hence a sharp conﬁguration. Furthermore, each of t1, . . . , t m must occur as an inner product in C′, from switching the roles of C and C′. 7. The 600-cell The ﬁnal conﬁguration is the vertices of the regular 600-cel l. The construction in Section 6 does not work in this case, and overall the 600-ce ll appears to be intrinsically more complicated than the sharp conﬁguratio ns. The fundamental problem is that it is only a spherical 11-design, but the poly nomial h constructed as in the previous section would have degree 15 (or 14 if one us es the alternate construction for antipodal conﬁgurations). Recall that be ing a spherical deg( h)design was crucial to having a sharp bound. In fact, h does turn out to be a positive-deﬁnite function in this case, but it proves a subo ptimal bound. Andreev and Elkies have shown in [An3, El] that a degree 17 pol ynomial with coeﬃcients in Q( √ 5) proves a sharp bound for the number of points in a spherical code with minimal angle π/ 5 = cos − 1(1 + √ 5)/ 4 on S3, although polynomials of lower degree do not work. A similar phenomenon occurs in our p roblem. What saves the proof is that although the 600-cell is not a spheric al 12-design, all spherical harmonics of degrees from 13 to 19 do indeed sum to 0 over th e 600-cell. Degree 12 is the only problem, and that can be addressed by ensuring t hat the 12-th ultraspherical coeﬃcient of h vanishes. The fact that spherical harmonics of degrees 13 through 19 sum to 0 over the 600-cell is easily checked using t he distance distribution from Table 2, which tells for each vertex how many others have a given inner product with it. One can also prove it using invariant theory as follows. The symmetry group of the 600-cell is the H4 reﬂection group, for which the ring of invariant polynomials has generators of degrees 2 (the trivial invari ant x ↦→ | x|2), 12, 20, and 30. Summing a polynomial over the vertices of the 600-cell am ounts to averaging it with respect to H4. For any degree that is not a nonnegative integer combinatio n of 12, 20, and 30, averaging must yield a polynomial that is co nstant on S3, and that constant vanishes for spherical harmonics because the y are orthogonal to the constant polynomials. For the 600-cell, we have m = 8 and