□ Deﬁne the length of a P L curve transverse to the 1-skeleton of a triangulated surface to be the number of edges of the 1-skeleton that it cro sses, counted with multiplicity. Lemma 5.3 A basic move in a surface with a triangulation of valence at mo st V can be realized by at most 28 elementary moves for a type 1 basi c move, 6V + 24 elementary moves for a type 2 basic move, and 22 elementary mo ves for a type 3 basic move. In all cases 17V elementary moves suﬃce. 29 Proof. We count the number of elementary moves required for each typ e of basic move. Lemma 5.2 implies that a type 1 basic move requires at most 14 e lementary moves in each of the two triangles meeting the edge along whic h the curve is isotoped. The type 2 basic move can be done in the following sequence of s teps. (1) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the arc in a neighborhoo d of an edge to pass through the adjacent vertex. (2) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the curve to run along ed ges in a neighborhood of the adjacent vertex. (3) V − 2 type 2 elementary moves slide the arc over a neighborhood of the vertex in each adjacent triangle. (4) At most 7 type 2 elementary moves slide the arc to basic cur ves in each of the original two triangles, by Lemma 5.2. (5) Two type 2 elementary moves slide the arc to basic curves i n each of the V − 2 triangles where new intersections were introduced. Summing, this basic move requires less than 3 V + 12 type 2 elementary moves, and 6 V + 24 in total. The type three basic move requires (1) One type 2 elementary move to slide the arc to coincide wit h a subarc of its adjacent edge. (2) At most 10 type 2 elementary moves slide the resulting arc to a basic curve with the same endpoints in the adjacent triangle, by an application of Lemma 5.2. This sums to at most 11 elementary moves of type 2 and 22 elementary moves of all types. Since V ≥ 3, in all cases 17 V elementary moves suﬃce. □ If two basic curves are isotopic using only basic moves of typ e 1, we say that they are parallel basic curves. 30 Figure 12: Elementary moves for a type 2 basic move. Lemma 5.4 Let α and β be two parallel basic curves with total length ℓ. Then α can be isotoped to coincide with β by ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1. Similarly, α can be isotoped across β by ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1. Proof. Each of α and β has length ℓ/ 2 and they intersect each triangle of the surface in pairs of parallel basic arcs. Using ℓ/ 2 basic moves of type 1, we can either move the intersections of α along each edge to coincide with the intersection of β with that edge, or move the intersections past to the other si de of β . □ Let α and β be intersecting simple closed curves in general position on a surface F . A 2-gon is a subdisk of F whose boundary consists of one subarc of each of α and β . A 2-gon is innermost if no arc of α or β meets its interior. In some cases, it can be shown that curves with excess intersect ion create innermost 2-gons. This is analyzed in some generality in [14]. The foll owing is Lemma 3.1 of [14]. Lemma 5.5 Let F be a compact orientable surface and let α and β be isotopic simple closed curves on F , intersecting transversely. Then either α and β are disjoint or there is an innermost 2-gon on F bounded by one arc from each of α and β . 31 Proof. The lift of α to the universal cover of F is a family of disjoint lines ˜α , and the lift of β is a similar family ˜β . Assume α and β intersect. Then a lift α 1 of α and a lift β 1 of β also intersect. The curves α 1 and β 1 are isotopic to disjoint lines by a lift of an isotopy making α and β disjoint. The fundamental group of F acts on the universal cover, and α 1 and β 1 have a common cyclic stabilizer. It follows that they intersect inﬁnitely often . An arc of each between adjacent crossing points cuts oﬀ a 2-gon in the universal cov er. A ﬁnite number of arcs of ˜α ∪ ˜β meet this 2-gon. Each such arc is disjoint from either ˜ α or ˜β , so that it cuts oﬀ a smaller 2-gon inside the previous one. We c an pass to an innermost 2-gon whose interior meets no arc of ˜ α ∪ ˜β . This 2-gon is disjoint from any of its translates, and must project 1-1 down to F . □ Lemma 5.6 Let F be an orientable triangulated surface with u triangles, and let α and β be isotopic simple basic curves on F intersecting transversely. Let l be the length of α ∪ β , and let V be the maximal valence of a vertex in F . There is an isotopy carrying β to α via no more than l4uV basic moves. Proof. We treat cases. Note that V ≥ 3, l ≥ 4 and u ≥ 4. Case 1: α and β are disjoint. Then α and β bound a subsurface of F homeomorphic to an annulus. We will perform a series of basic moves which isotop the curves t o coincide. The edges of F induces a cellulation of the annulus. The cells are subdisks of triangles, bounded by arcs in α ∪ β . If there is a vertex in this cellulation, we can slide α or β over a vertex by a basic move of type 2. Repeating at most u times, we eliminate all vertices in the annulus. The length o f α ∪ β is increased by at most V − 2 each time we do a basic move, so the ﬁnal curves have total length at most l + u(V − 2) = l + uV − 2u. The annulus between the curves is cut by the edges of F into a collection of cells. Since α and β are disjoint, and each cell boundary contains an edge lying on the 1-skeleton between each edge lying on α ∪ β , all cells are even sided. An Euler characteristic calculation shows that either all cel ls are 4-gons, or there is 32 a 2-gon cell in the annulus, bounded by a basic arc of type 2 and an arc on an edge of the triangulation. If there is a cell which is a 2-gon, we can perform a basic move o f type 3 which slides an arc of α or β across that 2-gon. This decreases the length of α ∪ β by