the unknot such that any sequence of Reidemeister moves converting D to the trivial knot must pass through some intermediate knot diagram D′ that has more crossings than D. Figure 1: Goeritz’s unknot. It is not known how much larger the number of crossings needs t o be for a general n-crossing knot, but Theorem 1.1 implies the following upper bound. Corollary 1.1 Any unknotted knot diagram D with n crossings can be transformed by Reidemeister moves to a trivial knot diagram throu gh a sequence of knot diagrams each of which has at most 2c1n crossings. This holds because each Reidemeister move creates or destro ys at most two crossings, and all crossings must be eliminated by the ﬁnal R eidemeister move. 3 It seems possible that for each knot diagram representing th e unknot there exists some sequence of Reidemeister moves taking it to the t rivial knot diagram which keeps the crossing number of all intermediate knot dia grams bounded by a polynomial in n. In a general triangulated 3-manifold, a trivial knot is a tri angle lying inside one tetrahedron and an elementary move takes place entirely within a single tetrahedron of the triangulation. The proof of Theorem 1.1 i s based on a general result that bounds the number of elementary moves needed to t ransform a closed polygonal curve K embedded in the 1-skeleton of a triangulated P L 3-manifold M to a trivial knot. Theorem 1.2 There is a constant c2 such that for each t ≥ 1, any compact, orientable, P L 3-manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) triangulated by t tetrahedra has the following property: If K is an unknot embedded in the 1-skeleton of interior ( M ), then K can be isotoped to the trivial knot using at most 2c2t elementary moves. We obtain the explicit value c2 = 10 7. The hypothesis that K lies in the interior of M can be weakened to requiring only that K lies in M , as we indicate in §6. The methods we use are based on the normal surface theory of Kn eser [20] and Haken [10]. Haken applied this theory to obtain an algori thm to decide if a knot is trivial. See [11] for a survey of algorithms to recogn ize unknotting, and [5] and [4] for possible alternate approaches based on braid s. The paper is organized as follows. In §2 we deﬁne elementary moves and outline the proof of Theorem 1.2. In §3, §4 and §5 we bound the number of elementary moves needed to isotop a curve in three distinct s ettings. First we consider an isotopy of a curve to a point across a compressi ng disk in a 3-manifold, secondly we consider an isotopy through a solid torus from a core to a longitude, and ﬁnally we consider an isotopy across a sur face between two isotopic curves. In §6 we tie these results together to complete the proof of Theorem 1.2. We then consider the more special case of knot s in R3. In 4 §7 we outline the proof of Theorem 1.1 and begin it by relating e lementary moves to Reidemeister moves. In §8 we start with a knot diagram and show how to construct a triangulation of a convex submanifold of R3 containing the corresponding knot on its 1-skeleton. This allows us to appl y Theorem 1.2. In §9 we complete the proof of Theorem 1.1. Note: After completing this paper we learned that S. Galatolo has o btained results about the case of Reidemeister moves in R3 similar to those stated in Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.1, and at about the same time. Gal atolo’s constructions are also based on an analysis of normal surfaces. An announcement of his results will appear in [8]. 2 Elementary Moves in a 3-manifold In this section we deﬁne elementary moves for knots and links . Elementary moves are well-deﬁned in arbitrary triangulated P L 3-manifolds. In section 7 we will discuss Reidemeister moves, which are associated to knots and links in R3, and relate these two concepts for manifolds P L-embedded in R3. A (piecewise linear, unoriented) knot K in a triangulated P L manifold M is a closed embedded polygonal curve. An (unoriented) link L is a ﬁnite union of nonintersecting knots in M . Let |L|denote the number of vertices of L. An elementary move (or ∆- move) on a knot or link consists of one of the following operations, see Burde and Zieschang [6, p. 4], Mur asugi [21, p. 7]. Each of these operations is required to take place in a single tetrahedron of M . (1) Split an edge into two edges by adding a new vertex to its in terior. (1′) [Reverse of (1)] Combine two edges whose union is a line segm ent, erasing their common vertex. (2) Given a line segment AB of L that contains a single interior vertex D and a point C not in L such that the triangle ABC intersects L only in edge AB, erase edge AB and add two new edges AC and BC and new vertex C. (2′) [Reverse of (2)] If for two adjacent edges AC and BC of K the triangle ABC intersects L only in AC and BC then erase AC, BC and vertex C and 5 add the edge AB, with a new interior vertex D. Figure 2: Two types of elementary moves. Corresponding to elementary moves of type (2), (2 ′) is the piecewise-linear operation of linearly pulling the edges of a link across a tri angle ABC . To deﬁne this operation, an extra vertex D on the segment AB must be speciﬁed; this is the role of elementary moves (1) and (1 ′). Two knots K1 and K2 are equivalent if one can be reached from the other by a ﬁnite sequence of elementary moves. This gives the same equ ivalence classes as requiring K1 and K2 to be ambient isotopic [25] in M . The unknot is the class of knots equivalent to a triangle contained in a tetrah edron, and a knot K is unknotted if it is equivalent to the unknot. Equivalently, an unknot is the boundary of a P L embedded disk in M [25]. We will work with knots embedded in the interior of M . This is not a signiﬁcant restriction, since it is possible t o perturb any knot which meets ∂M into the interior of M after some simplicial subdivision. We conclude this section by outlining the proof of Theorem 1. 2. We ﬁrst construct a compact triangulated P L submanifold MK by removing a solid torus neighborhood of K. By removing the interior of a solid torus neighborhood RK of K we construct a new triangulated manifold MK = M − RK. The boundary of MK consists of the original boundary ∂M plus a 2-torus ∂R K, called the peripheral torus. If K is unknotted then MK contains an essential normal disk S. Essential means that ∂S ⊆ ∂R K is not the boundary of any disk in the torus ∂R K. Drawing on Haken’s normal surface theory, a