be a normal disk in M that consists of w triangles. Then ∂S can be isotoped to a triangle by a sequence of at most 2w elementary moves on M , each of which takes place in a triangle or edge contained wit hin S. Proof. We will construct a sequence of w simple closed curves ∂S = C0, C1, C2, . . . , C w− 1 = ∂T where T is a triangle in S, and such that for 0 ≤ i ≤ w − 1: (i) Ci+1 is obtained from Ci by at most two elementary moves; either a move of type 2 ′ across a single triangle in S followed by a move of type 1 ′ which removes the extra vertex created by the ﬁrst move, or a move of type 1 followed by a move of type 2 across a single triangle in S. (ii) There is a triangulated disk Si contained in S which consists of w − i triangles, such that Ci = ∂S i. The construction proceeds by eliminating triangles in S one at a time by a sequence of steps, each consisting of two elementary moves, in such a way as to preserve the property that each Sj is a topological disk. We proceed by induction on j, with the base case j = 0 holding by hypothesis. For the induction step, we note that the only way that removing from Sj a triangle that contains at least one edge of ∂S j can yield a surface Sj+1 that is not a topological disk is by producing a vertex v that is a cut-point, i.e. v is visited twice in the curve ∂S j+1. In that case v is a vertex of ∂S j, which implies that the triangle that is removed must have exactly one edge on ∂S j, and the pair of elementary moves pulls this edge across to the two edges of this triangle that a re adjacent to v. We therefore proceed by ﬁrst checking if Sj has any triangle having two edges on ∂S j. If so, we remove this triangle to obtain Sj+1. If this cannot be done, then Sj must contain an interior vertex, because a triangulated pol ygon that has no interior vertices and contains more than one triangle contains at least 2 triangles having two edges on the boundary. In this case ther e exists a triangle 14 having one edge on the boundary which also has an interior ver tex, and we can pull across this triangle to obtain Sj+1. This completes the induction step. □ Putting all these results together yields: Lemma 3.4 Let MK be a triangulated P L 3-manifold consisting of t tetrahedra which is a truncated knot complement for K. If K is unknotted, then there is an essential normal disk S in MK that contains at most 28t+6 triangles, and S has a polygonal boundary K1 = ∂S which lies on the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K and consists of at most 28t+7 line segments. The boundary K1 of S can be transformed to a single triangle by at most 28t+7 elementary moves, with all intermediate curves being the boundary of some triangulate d subdisk of S. Proof. By Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 3.1 there exists an essential normal disk which is a fundamental surface for MK. The bound of Lemma 3.2 implies that this surface contains at most 7 t2 ·27t+2 < t 2 ·27t+5 < 28t+5 triangles and quadrilaterals. Since each quadrilateral consists of t wo triangles in the triangulation, we obtain the upper bound 2 8t+6 for the total number of triangles. The boundary ∂S contains at most two edges of each triangle, for a total of at most 2 8t+7 edges. Lemma 3.3 gives the stated bound on elementary moves. □ Remark. We could improve the above estimate by using a vertex minimal solution which is a disk. 4 Longitudes and cores of solid tori In this section we bound the number of elementary moves neede d to isotop a knot K in the 1-skeleton of a triangulated compact 3-manifold ( M, ∂M ) across an annulus to a curve K2 which is a longitude on the peripheral torus ∂R K of K. The main result of this section is the following: Theorem 4.1 Let (M, ∂M ) be a triangulated compact P L 3-manifold with t tetrahedra, let K be an unknotted curve embedded in Interior (M ), and let ∂R K be the peripheral torus of K in the second barycentric subdivision of M . Then 15 there exists a P L closed curve K2 in ∂R K which is a longitude for ∂R K in MK such that: (i). There is an embedded P L annulus S in the solid torus RK whose two boundary components are K2 and K, and which consists of at most 21858t triangles. (ii). There is an isotopy from K2 to K across S that consists of at most 21858t+1 elementary moves. Remarks. The closed curve K2 is embedded in ∂R K but generally does not lie in its 1-skeleton. In the special case that ( M, ∂M ) is P L-homeomorphic to a triangulated convex polyhedron in R3, as occurs with a standard knot, the exponential bounds in (i), (ii) can be improved to bounds pol ynomial in t, as we indicate after the proof. The proof of Theorem 4.1 proceeds in three steps. We ﬁrst cons truct a closed curve α embedded in the 1-skeleton of RK which is parallel to the core K, i.e. its homology class [ α ] in H1(∂R K, Z) has intersection number ± 1 with a meridian [µ ]. We next observe that the homology class in H1(∂R K, Z) of a longitude K2 is necessarily [K2] = ± ([α ] + k[µ ]) (4.9) for some integer k. The second step is to bound |k|by an exponential function of t. The third step is to obtain K2 from α by adding k twists to α near a ﬁxed meridian µ . Given K2, we construct a triangulated annular surface S embedded in RK which lies in the 2-skeleton of RK except in a “collar” of one meridian disk, into which the k twists are inserted. All vertices of the triangulated annul us S lie on its boundary ∂S = K2 ∪ K. Finally we obtain an isotopy giving the elementary move bound by pulling K across the triangles in S to K2. We begin with some preliminary lemmas involving P L topology, which pin down some of the combinatorial structure of the regular neig hborhood of K. Background for P L topology can be found in [17] or [26]. 16 Let v0, . . . , v r be the vertices of the knot K in M . Since RK lies in the second barycentric subdivision of M , each edge [ vi, vi+1] of K is subdivided into four edges by the addition of three new vertices . We will continue to denote the subdivided curve by K. Denote the original vertices vi by w4i and let w4i+1, w4i+2, w4i+3, 0 ≤ i ≤