g ) is positive deﬁnite. It is strictly conductive if it is conductive and for all strictly absolutely monotonic a, H(a, g ) is strictly positive deﬁnite of degree deg( g) − 1. Lemma 5.3. If g1 and g2 are conductive and g1 is positive deﬁnite, then g1g2 is conductive. If g1 is conductive and strictly positive deﬁnite and g2 is strictly conductive, then g1g2 is strictly conductive. Proof. As noted in the proof of Proposition 2.2, for every absolutel y monotonic function a on [ − 1, 1), H(a, g 1g2) = H(a, g 1) + g1H(Q(a, g 1), g 2). The lemma now follows from Proposition 2.2 and the fact that t he set of positivedeﬁnite (or strictly positive-deﬁnite) functions is close d under taking products. □ For r ∈ [− 1, 1), let ℓ r denote the linear polynomial ℓ r(t) = t − r. Clearly ℓ r is conductive, and even strictly conductive if r ̸= − 1, because H(a, ℓ r) is the constant polynomial a(r), which is nonnegative. Lemma 5.3 implies that if g is conductive and positive deﬁnite, then gℓ r is conductive. Consider the partial products j∏ i=1 (t − ti) for j ≤ m. By Theorem 3.1, this product is positive deﬁnite for j < m (even strictly positive deﬁnite), and for j = m it is positive deﬁnite because α ≥ 0. It follows UNIVERSALLY OPTIMAL DISTRIBUTION OF POINTS ON SPHERES 123 from Lemma 5.3 and the remarks in the previous paragraph that each product is conductive. Thus, m∏ i=1 (t − ti) is conductive, so Lemma 5.3 implies that its square is as well . Because h = H(a, F 2), we conclude that h is positive deﬁnite, as desired. These auxiliary polynomials are rarely optimal. For exampl e, consider the case n = 3, N = 20, and f (r) = 1 /r 1/ 2 that was discussed in Section 4. Numerical calculations suggest that the best bound is obtained by taki ng m = 3 and α = 0. 752718117 . . . (an algebraic number of degree 22). That yields a lower bound of 299. 708 . . . , which is worse than the bound of 301 . 204 derived in Section 4. However, it is reasonably close, especially given how simple and syst ematic the construction of h was. The connection between our construction and those used in [M RR W] and [KL] may not be immediately apparent. Those constructions are eq uivalent to using the polynomial (t − tm) m− 1∏ i=1 (t − ti)2 in the linear programming bounds for spherical codes with mi nimal angle θ satisfying cos θ = tm. The fact that m− 1∏ i=1 (t − ti) is positive deﬁnite is proved in those papers using the Chris toﬀel-Darboux formula. Unlike in our construction, α can be arbitrarily large. One can generalize the construction from this section as fol lows. Let p0, p 1, . . . be any family of orthogonal polynomials such that each is pos itive deﬁnite. Given m and α , choose t1, . . . , t m to be the roots of pm + αp m− 1. The construction and proof are essentially the same as before. The proof of Theore m 1.2 will be based on this approach. 6. Proof of the main theorem Let f : (0 , 4] → R be completely monotonic, deﬁne a(t) = f (2− 2t) as in Section 5, and let C ⊂ Sn− 1 be a sharp arrangement with |C|= N . To prove Theorem 1.2, we will construct an auxiliary polynomial h that satisﬁes the hypotheses of Proposition 4.1 and proves a sharp bound. The case when C is the set of vertices of the 600-cell is qualitatively more diﬃcult than the other cases , so for the time being we assume that we are in the sharp case. (We deal with the 600-cel l in Section 7.) Suppose that the possible inner products that occur between distinct points in C are t1, . . . , t m, ordered so that − 1 ≤ t1 < · · ·< t m < 1. Let h(t) be the Hermite interpolating polynomial that agrees with a(t) to order 2 at each ti. When t1 = − 1, it might seem more natural to interpolate only to ﬁrst orde r at that point. The purpose of second-order interpolation is to avoid sign changes in h(t) − a(t) when t = ti, and that is not a concern when t = − 1. In fact, ﬁrstorder interpolation works there, but we will omit the detail s here, because the only 124 HENRY COHN AND ABHINA V KUMAR advantage we see in it is that it leads to a slightly improved b ound on the number of derivative sign conditions one must impose on the potential function (it decreases by 1 the bound K mentioned in Section 1). See Section 8 for the details of that approach in a context in which it is more useful. Lemma 6.1. For all t ∈ [− 1, 1), h(t) ≤ a(t). The proof is identical to that of Lemma 5.1. Thus, the ﬁrst hyp othesis of Proposition 4.1 is satisﬁed. What remains to be shown is that h is a positive-deﬁnite function and that the bound is sharp. (The bound derived from this function h is not sharp for the 600-cell, which is why that case is more su btle and we have postponed it until later.) The sharpness of the lower bound is simple, because it follow s from the deﬁnition of a sharp arrangement that C is a spherical deg( h)-design. Thus, ∑ x,y ∈C Cn/ 2− 1 i (⟨x, y ⟩) = 0 whenever 0 < i ≤ deg(h); in fact, for each ﬁxed y, the polynomial Cn/ 2− 1 i (⟨x, y ⟩) has the same average over C as over the entire sphere Sn− 1, and it integrates to 0 over the sphere because it is a positive-degree spherica l harmonic and thus orthogonal to the constant functions. Because h agrees with a at the inner products t1, . . . , t m from C, the conditions for a sharp bound that were listed after the p roof of Proposition 4.1 are satisﬁed. The proof that h is positive deﬁnite is analogous to the proof in Section 5, bu t it will involve more elaborate lemmas. Deﬁne F (t) = m∏ i=1 (t − ti). Then h = H(a, F 2), and we will prove that F 2 is conductive. In fact, we will show that F 2 is strictly conductive, which will be important in the proof of uniqueness. Lemma 6.2. The function F is strictly positive deﬁnite. This lemma is a standard fact in the theory of linear programm ing bounds. We prove it as in [El]. Proof. The leading coeﬃcient of F in terms of powers of t is positive, which implies that its leading ultraspherical coeﬃcient is also positive . For the others, we apply orthogonality to see that the i-th ultraspherical coeﬃcient of F equals a positive constant (depending