similar to those stated in Theorem 1.1 and Corollary 1.1, and at about the same time. Gal atolo’s constructions are also based on an analysis of normal surfaces. An announcement of his results will appear in [8]. 2 Elementary Moves in a 3-manifold In this section we deﬁne elementary moves for knots and links . Elementary moves are well-deﬁned in arbitrary triangulated P L 3-manifolds. In section 7 we will discuss Reidemeister moves, which are associated to knots and links in R3, and relate these two concepts for manifolds P L-embedded in R3. A (piecewise linear, unoriented) knot K in a triangulated P L manifold M is a closed embedded polygonal curve. An (unoriented) link L is a ﬁnite union of nonintersecting knots in M . Let |L|denote the number of vertices of L. An elementary move (or ∆- move) on a knot or link consists of one of the following operations, see Burde and Zieschang [6, p. 4], Mur asugi [21, p. 7]. Each of these operations is required to take place in a single tetrahedron of M . (1) Split an edge into two edges by adding a new vertex to its in terior. (1′) [Reverse of (1)] Combine two edges whose union is a line segm ent, erasing their common vertex. (2) Given a line segment AB of L that contains a single interior vertex D and a point C not in L such that the triangle ABC intersects L only in edge AB, erase edge AB and add two new edges AC and BC and new vertex C. (2′) [Reverse of (2)] If for two adjacent edges AC and BC of K the triangle ABC intersects L only in AC and BC then erase AC, BC and vertex C and 5 add the edge AB, with a new interior vertex D. Figure 2: Two types of elementary moves. Corresponding to elementary moves of type (2), (2 ′) is the piecewise-linear operation of linearly pulling the edges of a link across a tri angle ABC . To deﬁne this operation, an extra vertex D on the segment AB must be speciﬁed; this is the role of elementary moves (1) and (1 ′). Two knots K1 and K2 are equivalent if one can be reached from the other by a ﬁnite sequence of elementary moves. This gives the same equ ivalence classes as requiring K1 and K2 to be ambient isotopic [25] in M . The unknot is the class of knots equivalent to a triangle contained in a tetrah edron, and a knot K is unknotted if it is equivalent to the unknot. Equivalently, an unknot is the boundary of a P L embedded disk in M [25]. We will work with knots embedded in the interior of M . This is not a signiﬁcant restriction, since it is possible t o perturb any knot which meets ∂M into the interior of M after some simplicial subdivision. We conclude this section by outlining the proof of Theorem 1. 2. We ﬁrst construct a compact triangulated P L submanifold MK by removing a solid torus neighborhood of K. By removing the interior of a solid torus neighborhood RK of K we construct a new triangulated manifold MK = M − RK. The boundary of MK consists of the original boundary ∂M plus a 2-torus ∂R K, called the peripheral torus. If K is unknotted then MK contains an essential normal disk S. Essential means that ∂S ⊆ ∂R K is not the boundary of any disk in the torus ∂R K. Drawing on Haken’s normal surface theory, a result of Hass, Lagar ias and Pippenger [12] implies that S can be chosen to contain at most 2 8t+6 triangles. We present 6 this argument for completeness in §2. Its boundary ∂S is a curve K2. K2 is isotopic to K within ¯RK. There is a sequence of at most 2 8t+7 elementary moves which deform K2 to a triangle across triangles in S. This is carried out in §3. It remains to relate K2 to K by elementary moves. In §3 we construct a curve K1 isotopic to K in RK which is a longitude, a curve on the peripheral torus, ∂R K, which bounds an embedded disk in MK but not inside the peripheral torus. Such curves exist if K is unknotted in M . In §4 we construct a longitude K2 that lies in the 1-skeleton of the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K, consists of at most O(2c3t) line segments and can be isotoped to K using at most O(2c3t) elementary moves. In §5 we prove results which are used to show that there is a sequence of at most O(2c4t) elementary moves which deform K1 to K2 while remaining entirely in the peripheral 2-torus ∂R K. In §6 we combine these results to complete the proof. All the const ants and bounds above are explicitly computed. The proof of Theorem 1.2 in eﬀect deforms the original knot K to a trivial knot with elementary moves made inside three surfaces: an an nulus is used to go from K to the longitude K1, a 2-torus is used to go from K1 to the boundary of a normal disk K2, and a disk is used to go from K2 to the trivial knot. 3 Normal surfaces and elementary moves across an essential disk In this section we assume given a compact P L 3-manifold with (possibly empty) boundary ( M, ∂M ), which is triangulated using t tetrahedra. We will work with a knot K embedded in the 1-skeleton of Interior( M ). By barycentrically subdividing M twice, we obtain a manifold ( M ′′, ∂M ′′) in which K has a regular neighborhood RK. The regular neighborhood, obtained by taking the closed star of K in M ′′, is a solid torus with ∂R K disjoint from ∂M . We let MK = (M ′′\RK) ∪ ∂R K and note that its boundary ∂M K = ∂M ′′∪ ∂R K. We call the manifold ( MK, ∂M K) with ∂R K marked a truncated knot complement 7 for K. A meridian on the peripheral torus ∂R K is an oriented simple closed curve µ whose homology class [ µ ] in H1(∂R, Z) generates the kernel of the map j∗ : H1(∂R K, Z)→ H1(RK , Z), where j : ∂R K֒→RK is the inclusion map. Equivalently, it is a simple closed curve which bounds a disk in RK but not in ∂R K. A longitude on the peripheral torus ∂R K is an oriented simple closed curve λ which intersects a meridian transversely at a single point a nd whose homology class [ λ ] in H1(∂R, Z) generates the kernel of the map i∗ : H1(∂R, Z)→ H1(MK, Z), where i : ∂R K֒→MK is the inclusion map, provided that this kernel is nontrivial. Note that the kernel is always inﬁnite cyclic or tri vial [6]. If the core K of the solid torus RK is unknotted in M , then a longitude exists, and it bounds a disk in MK. For general K, a longitude does not exist when K represents an element of