der Waerden proved in [SchW] that the minimal angle in suc h a code cannot be greater than π/ 2. Their analysis shows that all optimal codes consist of a pa ir of antipodal points with three points on the orthogonal plane. Among such codes, the only one that could be universally optimal is the one in which the three points form an equilateral triangle. However, when f (r) = (4 − r)7, there is a conﬁguration with lower energy: take a single point together with four points e quidistant from it and forming a square in the opposite hemisphere (the size of the s quare is chosen so as to minimize energy). Thus, the only candidate for a ﬁve-poin t universal optimum is not universally optimal. Furthermore, it is not even a loc al minimum for energy when f (r) = (4 − r)k with k suﬃciently large or f (r) = 1 /r s with s suﬃciently large. Leech proved a far stronger theorem in [Lee]. He classiﬁed th e conﬁgurations on S2 that are in equilibrium under all force laws, which is a neces sary but not suﬃcient condition for universal optimality. His theorem i mplies that there are no universal optima in R3 beyond those in Table 1, by ruling out all cases except for ﬁve points (see [Lee, p. 89]). We conjecture that for each n ≥ 3 there are only ﬁnitely many universal optima in Rn, but we cannot prove it even for n = 4. We do not know of any other spherical codes that could be added to Table 1, but some may well exist. One surprising case in which universal o ptimality fails is the vertices of the regular 24-cell on S3 (equivalently, the D4 root system). It is not a sharp conﬁguration, because it has four inner products besi des 1 while it is only a spherical 5-design, but one might still hope that it would be universally optimal. It appears to be optimal for many inverse power law potentials, but even this weaker conclusion is surprisingly subtle: for example, when one si mulates 24 randomly chosen points on S3 under the potential function f (r) = 1 /r , more than 90% of the time one reaches a local optimum with potential energy 334 . 096 . . . (an algebraic number of degree 20), which is only slightly worse than the po tential energy 334 of the 24-cell. In other words, there is a suboptimal arrangeme nt with a much larger basin of attraction. This arrangement belongs to an explici t one-parameter family of conﬁgurations analyzed in [CCEK]. In that paper, some of t hem were shown UNIVERSALLY OPTIMAL DISTRIBUTION OF POINTS ON SPHERES 107 to improve on the 24-cell for certain completely monotonic p otential functions, including f (r) = (4 − r)k with 8 ≤ k ≤ 13 and f (r) = e− 3r. The 24-cell is therefore not universally optimal. The remaining regular polytopes (the cubes in Rn for n ≥ 3, the dodecahedron in R3, and the 120-cell in R4) are also not universally optimal, for a less interesting reason: they are not even optimal spherical codes. Antipris ms improve on cubes, and [Sl] deals with the other two cases. Thus, a full-dimensi onal regular polytope is universally optimal if and only if all its faces are simpli ces. One might also wonder about the (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code that is the kissing conﬁguration of the universally optimal (5 , 16, 1/ 5) code. It consists of the midpoints of the edges of a regular simplex. This code is not universally o ptimal, because for the potential functions f (r) = (4 − r)k with 3 ≤ k ≤ 6, arranging two regular pentagons on orthogonal planes yields lower potential energy. For k ≤ 2 their potential energies agree; for k ≥ 7, the (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code is superior to the two pentagons, but we do not know whether it is optimal in these cases. Note th at the kissing conﬁguration of this (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code is a (3 , 6, 1/ 7) code that is not even optimal, let alone universally optimal. The (4 , 10, 1/ 6) code described above is a spherical 2-design in which only two inner products occur between distinct points. It follows th at replacing the bound 2m − 1 with 2 m − 2 in Deﬁnition 1.1 would make Theorem 1.2 false. Probably the (21 , 336, 1/ 5) kissing conﬁguration of the (22 , 891, 1/ 4) code is not universally optimal, but in this case we do not know a better c onﬁguration. We also do not know whether universal optimality holds for the ( 20, 105, 1/ 8) kissing conﬁguration of the (21 , 162, 1/ 7) code or the (21 , 77, 1/ 12) kissing conﬁguration of the (22 , 100, 1/ 11) code. These conﬁgurations are not sharp, so Theorem 1.2 d oes not apply. We do not know whether there exist universally optimal spher ical codes whose universal optimality cannot be proved by our methods. It see ms likely that such codes exist, but we have no candidates to propose. Another important question not addressed by our methods is w hether there are other local minima for potential energy in the cases listed i n Table 1. In certain special cases the existence of other minima is trivial; for e xample, for f (r) = 4 − r, a conﬁguration minimizes potential energy if and only if its centroid is the origin, so there is a positive-dimensional space of global minima (whe n N > 3). In general, that is true for f (r) = (4 − r)k if k is small relative to the number of points in the conﬁguration. (It was proved in [SZ] that spherical k-designs exist on Sn− 1 for all suﬃciently large numbers of points. Spherical k-designs automatically minimize energy for f (r) = (4 − r)k, and because the set of such designs is closed under rotation and taking unions they exist in positive-dimensio nal families once the number of points is large enough.) For suﬃciently large k or for inverse power laws, the set of local minima appears to be ﬁnite, but sometim es there are several. When the number of points is large, there can be vast numbers o f local minima. For example, experiments suggest that for 120 points on S3 under the harmonic power law potential, there are more than ﬁve thousand distin ct local minima, and perhaps far more than that. It is natural to ask whether the requirement of complete mono tonicity could be weakened. For example, regular simplices are optimal for al l decreasing, convex potential functions, although not for all decreasing poten tial functions. That does 108 HENRY COHN AND ABHINA V KUMAR not always hold. Speciﬁcally, the icosahedron is not even a l ocal minimum for the decreasing, convex potential function f (r) = r3 − 48r + 128, but rather a saddle point. One can show using Proposition 4.1 that the glo bal minimum for twelve points