inﬁnite order in H1(M, Z). If M ∼ = S3, or more generally a homology sphere, then a longitude exists for any K. This curve is sometimes called a preferred longitude. When a longitude λ of ∂R K exists, its intersection number on ∂R K with a meridian µ is ± 1, and the homology classes [ µ ] and [ λ ] generate H1(∂R, Z) ∼ = Z ⊕ Z. A properly embedded disk in a 3-manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) is a disk S PL-embedded in M which satisﬁes S ∩ ∂M = ∂S . An essential disk in M is a properly embedded disk such that ∂S does not bound a disk in ∂M , i.e. the homotopy class of ∂S in π 1(∂M ) is non-trivial. Lemma 3.1 Let MK be a triangulated P L 3-manifold which is a truncated knot complement for K. Then K is unknotted if and only if MK contains an essential disk S with ∂S a longitude in ∂R K. 8 Proof. If K is unknotted then it bounds a disk which is embedded in M . This disk can be intersected with MK to give an essential P L disk S in MK. Conversely if MK contains an essential P L disk S with ∂S ⊆ ∂R K, then the boundary ∂S of S represents a longitude on ∂R K, which is isotopic to K in RK [6, p. 29, Thorem 3.1], and therefore is equivalent to K. This disk can be used to contract ∂S until it becomes a single triangle in MK. The ﬁrst homology group of a torus, Z ⊕ Z, is canonically isomorphic to its fundamental group, and the statement about the homology class of [ ∂S ] is a consequence. □ We will use normal surface theory in the form described in Jac o and Rubinstein [18, Section 1]. A normal surface S in a triangulated compact 3-manifold M is a P L-surface whose intersection with each tetrahedron in M consists of a disjoint set of elementary disks . These are either triangles and quadrilaterals. A quadrilateral consists of two triangles glued together al ong an edge lying interior to the tetrahedron. All other edges of each triangle o r quadrilateral are contained in the 2-skeleton of the tetrahedron, and do not in tersect any vertices. (See Figure 3). Figure 3: Elementary disks in a normal surface. Within each tetrahedron of M there are only 7 kinds of possible triangle or P L quadrilateral, up to P L-isotopies that map the tetrahedron to itself. These are labeled by the 7 possible ways of partitioning the vertic es of the tetrahedron into the two nonempty sets determined by cutting the tetrahe dron along the triangle or quadrilateral. W. Haken observed that the isoto py-type of a normal surface is completely determined by the number of pieces of e ach of the 7 kinds 9 that occur in each tetrahedron ∗. This can be described by a nonnegative integer vector v = v(S) ∈ Z7t, which gives the normal coordinates of S. He also showed that the set of allowable values v(S) for a normal surface S lie in a certain homogeneous rational cone CM in R7t which we call the Haken normal cone . If v = ( v1, v2, . . . , v 7t) ∈ R7t, then Haken’s normal cone is speciﬁed by a set of linear equations and inequalities of the form vi ≥ 0 , for 1 ≤ i ≤ 7t , (3.1) vi1 + vi2 = vi3 + vi4 (up to 6 t equations) . (3.2) The second set of equations expresses matching conditions which say that the number of edges on a common triangular face of two adjacent te trahedra coming from regions in each of the tetrahedra must match. For each tr iangular face there are three types of edges (speciﬁed by a pair of edges on t he triangle), which yields 3 matching conditions per face. Triangular fac es in the boundary ∂M give no matching equations. The cone CM is rational because all equations 3.1, 3.2 have integer coeﬃcients. We let CM (Z) = CM ∩ Z7t , (3.3) which is the set of integral vectors in the Haken normal cone CM . Haken deﬁned a fundamental surface to be a normal surface S such that v(S) ̸= v1 + v2 , with v1, v2 ∈ C M (Z)\{0} . Such a vector v(S) is called an element of the minimal Hilbert basis H(CM ) of CM , using the terminology of integer programming, see Schrijv er [27, Theorem 16.4]. Theorem 3.1 (Haken) If a triangulated, irreducible, orientable, compa ct 3manifold with boundary ( M, ∂M ) contains an essential disk whose boundary is in a component ∂R of ∂M , then it contains such an essential disk S with boundary in ∂R which is a fundamental normal surface. ∗Haken’s [10] treatment of normal surfaces was based on a form ulation using cells. W e follow an alternate development based on tetrahedra, as in J aco and Rubinstein [18, Section 1] and Jaco and Tollefson [19] 10 Proof. See Jaco-Rubinstein [18, Theorem 2.3] for a treatment of the existence of an essential normal disk in M with boundary on ∂R . For a fundamental disk, we refer to Jaco and Tollefson [19, Corollary 6.4], which est ablishes the stronger result that there exists such a disk that is a fundamental sur face and is also a vertex surface, which means that v(S) lies on an extreme ray of Haken’s normal cone CM . □ Remark. This result applies in arbitrary 3-manifolds. The proof in [ 19] assumes compactness and irreducibility of M , but these hypotheses can be removed. A classical theorem of Alexander implies that knot co mplements in the 3-sphere are always irreducible. Hass, Lagarias and Pippenger [12] give a simple bound for the complexity of any fundamental surface, whose proof we include for compl eteness. Lemma 3.2 Let M be a triangulated compact 3-manifold, possibly with boundary, that contains t tetrahedra. (1) Any vertex minimal solution v ∈ Z7t of the Haken normal cone C M in R7t has max 1≤ i≤ 7t (vi) ≤ 27t− 1 . (3.4) (2) Any minimal Hilbert basis element v ∈ Z7t of the Haken fundamental cone CM has max 1≤ i≤ 7t (vi) < t ·27t+2 . (3.5) Proof. (1) Choose a maximal linearly independent subset of matchin g condition equations 3.2. There will be 7 t − d of them, where d = dim R( C M ). Any vertex ray is determined by adjoining to these equations d − 1 other binding inequality constraints {vik = 0; 1 ≤ k ≤ d − 1} , with the proviso that the resulting system have rank 7 t − 1. These conditions yield a (7 t− 1)× 7t integer matrix M of rank 7 t− 1, and the vertex ray elements 11 z = (z1, . . . , z 7t) satisfy M z = 0 . In order to get a feasible vertex ray in C M all nonzero coordinates zi must have the